\documentclass[twoside,titlepage,11pt,twocolumn,a4paper]{article}
\usepackage{mathtools}
\usepackage[square,super,sort&compress]{natbib}
\usepackage{graphicx}
\usepackage[unicode,pagebackref,colorlinks]{hyperref}
\usepackage{SIunits}

\begin{document}
\title{Verification of Nuclear Disarmament \\
Challenges and Prospects}
\author{J.~Aldridge, L.~Barritt, V.~Christodoulou, H.~Lu, \\
	R.~Moors, J.~Rajroop, N.~Theodorou, K.~Xiao, \\
\small	Department of Physics and Astronomy, \\
\small	University College London, \\
\small	London WC1E 6BT, \\
\small	United Kingdom}
\date{21\textsuperscript{st} March 2012}
\maketitle

\onecolumn
\cleardoublepage

\section*{Executive summary}
\subsection*{The Context}
Why do we Verify?  We verify to assure confidence. We have a
declaration, our verification methods, and our confidence. If we are
too intrusive with our verification methods there is the threat of the
spread of proliferation information which could in turn lead to a
breakdown of the declaration agreements alongside an increased risk of
mass devastation. If the verification methods employed are too feeble,
the uncertainty in the confidence will be high and inspectors may fail
to detect anomalous behaviour in the host's disarmament activities.

This balance is known as the information barrier and it is spawn from
the consideration of ratified treaties, the capabilities of the
equipment and the feasibility of the procedure. The treaties outline
what information should and shouldn't be shared with the inspectors;
the equipment and procedure are the technological or economic
constraints.

*A chart of time, treaty and declaration information or disarmament
rates, there should be an inflection at 2002 *

\subsection*{The Conclusion}
(What are the Strengths weaknesses opportunities and threats?)
\subsection*{Final Summary}

\newpage
\tableofcontents
\twocolumn

\section{2nd}
TODO: Wrap up
\section{Introduction}
\section{Background}
Weapons-grade nuclear material explode just by putting them
together. The limits at which the material begin to sustain the chain
reaction required for explosion, also known as criticality, is
extremely sensitive to slight changes in the environment. The late
Feynman from the Manhattan Project had been able to salvage the
Uranium refinement plant from exploding a hundred times over. He noted
that, even after briefing about the sensitivities and some numerical
limits, policy makers continue to formulate dangerous
policies. TODO:CITATION The gravity of the situation is difficult to
convey. It is imperative that reports on nuclear policy include the
basic physics for safety reasons. This report, at various points,
depends upon the model of the nuclear weaponry used, and the model
discussed follows the preliminary physics required for informed
decisions. Rough information about the monetary costs are provided
wherever appropriate.

This report had been commissioned mainly for the formation of policy;
a brief overview of the current political background relevant for
decision making is also provided. The disarmament and verification
process is directly affected by the various barriers to the free flow
of information. Although these barriers have been erected to prevent
dissemination of rightfully sensitive information, this commission
argues that the current restrictions cripples the verification
process and should be throttled back. 

\subsection{Preliminary Physics}
Nuclear weaponry cause destruction by releasing parts of the large
amounts of energy dormant in the nucleus of atoms over a short period
of time. This process is the most efficient that current technology
has access to. Different types, or elements, of atoms behave
differently in this process. Lighter elements can release energy when
they fuse together to make heavier elements, whereas the heaviest
elements release energy by breaking apart, by
fission. Figure~\ref{nuclearBindingEnergyBowl} shows a simplified view
of the separation; the horizontal axis roughly corresponds to the size
or weight of the elements while the vertical axis maps quite well to
the energy. In simple terms, imagine a ball on this ramp; no matter on
the left or the right sides, the ball tends to roll towards the centre
region where the energy is least. The vertical distance between the
initial and final states is the energy released by the reaction.

\begin{figure}
  \caption{TODO:CITATION}
  \label{nuclearBindingEnergyBowl}
\end{figure}

There are some relevant complications to the simplified picture. The
type of element that mainly defines the atom's properties is the
number of protons in the atom. This is known as the atomic number \(
\left ( Z \right ) \) of the element. For each given \(Z\), there can
be some variation on the number of neutrons, \(N\), in the atom, and
each variation is known as an isotope of the same element. It is
chemically difficult to tell the variations of \(N\) apart. Since the
masses of protons and neutrons are similar, the mass number \( \left (
A \right ) \), roughly defined by \(A=N+Z\), is a good measure of the
weight of each individual atom. Note that, although only as an
approximation, \(A\) and the bulk material mass density of an element
grows together. For the most part of this report, the important
elements are Uranium \( \left ( Z_{\textrm{Uranium}} = 92 \right ) \)
and Plutonium \( \left ( Z_{\textrm{Plutonium}} = 94 \right )
\). Their respective important isotopes have \(A\) equal to 235, 238,
239 and 240. This report follows chemistry notation by writing them as
\( \mathrm{^{235}U} \), \( \mathrm{^{238}U} \), \( \mathrm{^{239}Pu}
\) and \( \mathrm{^{240}Pu} \) respectively.

One of the notable complications is that, although all four of these
isotopes are fissionable, only the odd numbered versions are
fissile. Fissionable means that these isotopes can be made to release
energy via fission, and it is not immediately obvious why is it that
not all fissionable materials are also fissile. It turned out that the
oddness and evenness of the number of neutrons and protons in an atom
had such a great influence on the energy of the nucleus that it causes
the difference. As such, \( \mathrm{^{238}U} \) and \(
\mathrm{^{240}Pu} \) fails to have enough energy to sustain a chain
reaction and are thus not fissile. This is one manifestation of the
sensitivities of the nuclear process to environmental conditions.

The above consideration also explains why there is a need to refine
nuclear material when making a bomb -- Non-fissile isotopes hinder the
energy extraction from the nucleus. Naturally occurring Uranium, for
example, mainly consists of \( \mathrm{^{238}U} \).  Uranium is said
to be enriched when the percentage of \( \mathrm{^{235}U} \) is
increased to above 20\% by the process of isotope separation, whereas
weapons-grade Uranium (WgU) consists of above
90\%. \citep{blackmarket} Weapons-grade Plutonium (WgPu) is 93.5\% \(
\mathrm{^{239}Pu} \) and 6\% \( \mathrm{^{240}Pu} \) whereas reactor
grade Plutonium is 58\% \( \mathrm{^{239}Pu} \) and 24\% \(
\mathrm{^{240}Pu} \). \citep{drell1993}

Another manifestation of the sensitivities that is by now thoroughly
understood is the criticality under many conditions. Feynman had
already pointed out above that water and other substances can
dramatically shift the criticality limits around. TODO:CITATION The
criticality of these materials are so well understood that, by 1946,
dangerous criticality experiments were performed. Separating two
hemispheres of Plutonium was just the screwdriver in the hand of the
scientist at Los Alamos. TODO:CITATION Fermi had, reportedly, warned
these scientists to stop their dangerous behaviour before they killed
themselves; they subsequently did exactly that in an
accident. However, their ability to precisely determine the point of
criticality to even \emph{attempt} the experiment shows the efficacy
of our physical knowledge. That knowledge, however, requires rather
complete information to be of \emph{any} use; an issue this report
will have to address later.

From the above consideration, it is obvious that a bomb could be made
by simply assembling two hemispheres of near-criticality pieces. This
is the essence of the ``gun-type'' nuclear fission bombs. The design,
however, is incredibly inefficient TODO:CITATION, requiring a lot of
extremely expensive highly enriched (even for weapons-grade work)
nuclear material and wasting most of them in the explosion. The
explosion would disperse the nuclear material too quickly for much
reaction to happen. Hence, this design is absent from current
stockpiles. Thus, this commission sees no point in belabouring this
type of bomb any further.

\begin{figure}
  \caption{A typical ``gun-type'' fission bomb}
\end{figure}

A simple way to increase efficiency is to increase the length of time
whereby the nuclear chain reaction effectively occurs. Such an
increase is usually achieved by providing the nuclear materials with
momentum to congregate -- the explosive reaction has to then spend
some time to reverse the momentum before the nuclear materials
dissipate. Currently, all nuclear bombs employ this method, with
variations, and this report focuses upon the detection of this
mechanism. The method of providing the nuclear material with
congregating momentum is known as compression, and the bomb would be
of the implosion type.

Before a detailed discussion of the issues surrounding the detection
of the nuclear material in the implosion type bomb, a few
nomenclature introductions and the possibility of nuclear fusion being
involved should be addressed. The original atomic bomb used only the
nuclear fission reaction for its explosive impact. Bombs of this type
are known as fission bombs or weapons. To achieve nuclear fusion, a
lot of energy is required, and current technology is only capable of
delivering the required energy via nuclear fission. i.e. for any bomb
that relies upon nuclear fusion to derive its energy, nuclear fission
must be employed. Such combination bombs are known as thermonuclear
weapons.

The categorisation of nuclear weapons is further complicated by other
factors. For the purposes of this report, issues like the type of
destruction maximised (killing by electromagnetic radiation, neutrons
or conventional heat) and so on are irrelevant. This commission,
however, would like to mention that fusion weapons can be further
classified by the usage of the fusion process: If the nuclear fusion
is only employed to increase the efficiency of the nuclear fission
process, then the bomb is a fusion-boosted fission weapon. If the
nuclear fusion is the main process providing the energy, then the
regular name suffices. The difference is small enough that confusion
is of little consequence.

\subsubsection{Working Model}

\subsection{Politics}
As can be expected from causality, the present situation is formed
through the various historical developments. A concise summary of the
relevant events is presented; Where appropriate, current events are
also included. The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), is
introduced as the standard organisation. Because the problem is one of
worldwide cooperation, international treaties form the foundation upon
which disarmament verification is performed. It shall be shown that
the treaties of relevance lead to the formation of information
barriers, and their consequences are briefly touched upon. Finally,
some non-political issues that are of importance are iterated. 



\section{1st}
\section{Introduction}

\subsection{Facts on Nuclear Weapons}
Nuclear weapons are devices that generate a massive amount of energy
from nuclear reactions, used to create mass destruction. These weapons
come in two forms of bomb: nuclear fission or a combination of fission
and fusion (thermonuclear). Weapons where the entire explosive output
is generated by a fission reaction are called atomic bombs. The
majority of their energy occurs in fission reactions where a piece of
sub-critical material is ``shot'' into a mass of fissile material with
a supercritical mass. This begins an exponentially increasing chain
reaction, releasing energy. Another method uses compression of the
sub-critical sphere of fuel, by using an explosive to implode the
sphere. The two most commonly used fissile materials for atomic bombs
are (enriched) uranium-235 and plutonium-239. Uranium is said to be
enriched when the percentage of uranium-235 is increased to above 20\%
by the process of isotope separation, whereas weapons grade consists
of above 90\%. \citep{blackmarket} Weapons-grade plutonium is 93.5\%
Pu-239 and 6\% Pu-240 whereas reactor grade plutonium is 58\% Pu-239
and 24\% Pu-240.  \citep{drell1993}

The second type of nuclear weapon is the thermonuclear (or hydrogen)
bomb, and these utilise fusion reactions.  The fusion reaction
typically occurs with deuterium and tritium to release energy, but
this is first triggered by a fission reaction to heat the fusion
fuel. There are six countries purportedly that have conducted
thermonuclear weapons: the United States, Russia, United Kingdom, The
People's Republic of China, France and India.

Nuclear weapons were essential to maintaining international security
during the Cold War because they were a means of deterrence. The end
of the Cold War made the doctrine of mutual Soviet--American
deterrence obsolete. Deterrence continues to be a relevant
consideration for many states with regard to threats from other
states. But reliance on nuclear weapons for this purpose is becoming
increasingly hazardous and decreasingly effective, in such a way that
nuclear weapons have no real legitimate purpose in today’s world. They
are immoral to use, would cause genocide, and their use is illegal due
to inevitable civilian casualties. These weapons kill everything in
their path and also cause additional death through radioactive
fallout. The effects of detonating a weapon can spread for hundreds of
miles, causing long-term health problems for people not killed in the
explosion.

In the 21\textsuperscript{st} century around \$50 billion a year, or
10\% of the annual US military budget, is spent on nuclear
weapons. \citep{USspending} The US spent \$5.8 trillion on nuclear
weapons between the early 1940s and 1996. Trident, the UK's nuclear
weapons system, costs up to \$4 billion a year to run, and plans to
replace it will cost \$154 billion.

The likelihood that non-state terrorists will come into possession of
nuclear weaponry is increasing, so the need for disarmament is also
increasing. In today's war waged on world order by terrorists, nuclear
weapons are the ultimate means of mass devastation. New security
challenges are presented by the fact that non-state terrorist groups
in possession of nuclear weapons are conceptually outside the bounds
of a deterrent strategy.

There is also an economic incentive to dismantle nuclear weapon
stockpiles -- it has been estimated that worldwide costs exceeded \$1
trillion dollars for 2010--2011. \citep{worldSpending} This is in
comparison to the estimate that the cost of implementing a
dismantlement program for processing plutonium and highly enriched
uranium into non-weapons grade material would cost just \$7 billion
per year for ten years. \citep{worldSafe} This minimal amount in
comparison is equivalent to less than half of unaccountable spending
in the Pentagon over the last decade, 0.09\% of current world military
spending, or 25\% of the \$28 billion spent every year to keep nuclear
weapons secure.

Disassembly can last from a few days to a period of a few weeks,
depending on the bomb or type of warhead. \citep{kopte1996} Ideally
once the dismantlement has taken place, the individual parts would be
disposed of or incinerated, so that they could not be reused. The
difficulty in the dismantlement process comes from verification of
whether the weapon is genuine without compromising sensitive national
security information.

Inspectors would not be allowed to know details of the size, shape and
composition etc. of the warhead. The quantity of fissile material in a
nuclear warhead is typically classified, so techniques have to be used
by the inspectors to ensure nothing is hidden when they are not able
to measure it in detail themselves.

One certainty of the dismantlement process is the problem of dealing
with the hundreds of tons of plutonium and thousands of tons of highly
enriched uranium that the warheads contain. A way to deal with this
would be to build a specialised nuclear power reactor that could use
the plutonium and uranium as fuel. This process would generate
electric power and convert the fuel into a form that cannot be used in
nuclear weapons again. \citep{moxFuel, feiveson2011, nature2009}

\subsubsection{Nuclear Weapons States}
Although exact numbers are not known, there are around 20,000 to
40,000 nuclear weapons in the world. \citep{worldNuclearForces2011,
  norris2010} These weapons have the capability to destroy entire
cities, murdering hundreds of thousands of people in the
process. These devices have no place in a peaceful world and bring
limitations to human development.

\begin{table}
  \begin{tabular}{|c|c|c|c|}
    \hline
    Country	& Active& Total		& CTBT	\\
    \hline
    USA		& 1950 	& 8500		& S	\\
    Russia	& 2430 	& 11000		& R	\\
    UK		& 160 	& 225		& R	\\
    France	& 290	& 300		& R	\\
    China	& 180	& 240		& S	\\
    India	&	& 90		& N	\\
    Pakistan	&	& 100		& N	\\
    North Korea	&	& \(<\)10	& N	\\
    Israel	&	& 140		& S	\\
    \hline
  \end{tabular}
  \caption{Number of nuclear warheads, active and total, by
    country. Status of ratification of the Comprehensive Test Ban
    Treaty (CTBT) is also shown. S denotes Signatory, R means Ratified
    and N for Non-Signatory.}
  \label{tab:NWSwarheadsCTBT}
\end{table}

\subsubsection{International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)}
The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) is an international
organisation established on 29 July 1957 as an autonomous organisation
through its own international treaty, the IAEA Statute, and reports to
both the UN General Assembly and Security Council. It serves as an
intergovernmental forum for scientific and technical cooperation in
the peaceful use of nuclear technology and nuclear power
worldwide. The programs of the IAEA encourage the development of the
peaceful applications of nuclear technology, provide international
safeguards against misuse of nuclear technology and nuclear materials,
and promote nuclear safety (including radiation protection) and
nuclear security standards and their implementation.

The missions of the IAEA are decided upon based on the needs and
interests of its Member States, strategic plans and the vision
embodied in the IAEA Statute. There are three main areas that the IAEA
works in: Safety and Security; Science and Technology; and Safeguards
and Verification. Within these areas the IAEA has its core missions
and objectives; encouraging member states to use nuclear power
peacefully, introducing and enforcing safeguards to verify that
nuclear energy is only used for non-military purposes, and promoting
high standards for nuclear safety.

The IAEA executes these missions by inspecting existing nuclear
facilities to ensure their peaceful and safe use, providing
information needed to ensure the safety and security of nuclear
facilities, and acting as a hub for the various fields of science
involved in the peaceful applications of nuclear technology.

\subsubsection{Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT)}
The NPT is a landmark international treaty whose objective is to
prevent the spread of nuclear weapons and weapons technology, to
promote cooperation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and to
further the goal of achieving nuclear disarmament and general and
complete disarmament. The Treaty represents the only binding
commitment in a multilateral treaty to the goal of disarmament by the
nuclear-weapon States. Opened for signature in 1968, the Treaty
entered into force in 1970. On 11 May 1995, the Treaty was extended
indefinitely. A total of 190 parties have joined the Treaty, including
the five nuclear-weapon States. More countries have ratified the NPT
than any other arms limitation and disarmament agreement, a testament
to the Treaty's significance. Recalling the determination expressed by
the Parties to the 1963 Treaty banning nuclear weapons tests in the
atmosphere, in outer space and under water in its Preamble, its goal
is to achieve the discontinuance of all test explosions of nuclear
weapons for all time and to continue negotiations to this end.

Other goals are to further the easing of international tension and the
strengthening of trust between States in order to facilitate the
cessation of the manufacture of nuclear weapons, the liquidation of
all their existing stockpiles, and the elimination from national
arsenals of nuclear weapons and the means of their delivery pursuant
to a Treaty on general and complete disarmament under strict and
effective international control. \citep{statement2005}

\subsubsection{Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty (CTBT)}
On 10 September 1996 the treaty was adopted by the UN General
Assembly; on 24 September 1996 it then opened for signature in New
York, when it was signed by 71 States, including five of the eight
then nuclear-capable states. As of January 2012, 156 states have
ratified the CTBT and another 26 states have signed but not ratified
it, including China, Egypt, Iran, Israel and the United States. India,
North Korea and Pakistan have yet to sign it (see
Table~\ref{tab:NWSwarheadsCTBT}).

There have been several other treaties with the aim of encouraging
disarmament, with varying degrees of success. Limited success was
achieved with the signing of the Partial Test Ban Treaty in 1963,
which banned nuclear tests in the atmosphere, underwater and in space,
but neither France nor China signed it. However, after an 80 to 19
vote in the United States Senate meant that the treaty was still
ratified by the United States. In 1968 the Nuclear Non-Proliferation
Treaty (NPT) was signed, which was a major step towards
non-proliferation of nuclear. This particular treaty decreed the
prohibition of possessing, manufacturing or acquiring nuclear weapons
or other nuclear explosive devices for non-nuclear weapon states. It
committed all signatories, including nuclear weapon states, to the
goal of total nuclear disarmament. However, as mentioned previously,
India, Pakistan and Israel have declined to ratify the NPT. Their
grounds for doing so were that the treaty is fundamentally
discriminatory; it places limitations on states that do not have
nuclear weapons but does not attempt to restrict weapons development
by those who are declared nuclear weapons states.

Due to the political climate of the next few decades, very little
progress was made in nuclear disarmament until 1991, but that year an
amendment conference was held to discuss the proposal of converting
the Treaty into one banning all nuclear-weapon tests. The UN General
Assembly gave it strong support, leading to negotiations for a
comprehensive test-ban treaty beginning in 1993. It took three years
of intense effort and work to draft the Treaty text and its two
annexes, but a consensus could not be reached on the adoption of the
text in the Conference on Disarmament (in which negotiations were
being held). Under the direction of the Australian Prime Minister John
Howard and Foreign Minister Alexander Downer, the text of a draft
resolution was submitted to the United Nations General Assembly in New
York. The CTBT was finally adopted by a large majority, exceeding
two-thirds of the General Assembly's Membership on 10 September 1996.

U.S. President Barack Obama in April 2010 called for the world's
nuclear weapon arsenal to be vastly reduced. He labelled the thousands
of remaining weapons ``the most dangerous legacy of the Cold War.''
For this to be achieved would require cooperation because the Nuclear
Weapon States (NWS) and a trusted verification and dismantlement
process.

\subsubsection{Nuclear Weapon Components}
\begin{figure}
   
  \caption{General internal components of a fission
    bomb. \citep{fissionBomb}}
\end{figure}

Using the so called `gun' method is probably the easiest for purely
fission reaction bombs. These derive their energy from the splitting
of heavy nuclei that are bombarded by neutrons to decay into lighter
elements, releasing energy. This then begins a chain reaction. For
fission bombs, at least 8kg of Plutonium-239 is needed, or 25kg of HEU
are needed to build weapons. \citep{cochran1995} To start the reaction
in the gun method, about 44kg of TNT are necessary
\citep{howToMakeBomb} for the explosive charge, which is placed behind
a `bullet' that forms the moving part. This is what strikes the
physics package. This physics package comprises of two halves of the
fuel shaped into hemispheres, separated by approximately 4cm. The
method relies on the separation to keep the system from reaching
criticality and blowing. When the bullet interacts with the halves,
they are brought together to start the chain reaction, going
supercritical for an explosion to occur.

\begin{figure}
  
  \caption{Basic components of a thermonuclear weapon.
    \citep{thermonuclearBomb}}
\end{figure}

Thermonuclear weapons utilise technology from fission bombs to create
enough heat for fusion that then releases more energy.  Initially the
fission bomb implodes, releasing energy. The fusion fuel in the
primary core is then compressed beginning a nuclear fusion
reaction. This then releases more neutrons to further the nuclear
fission reaction. This entire process increases the efficiency of the
weapon. The energy from these initial stages transfers further to the
secondary stage of the fusion reaction, again compressing the fuel
(deuterium, tritium) and a `sparkplug', causing it to go critical,
creating another chain reaction and heating the deuterium to even
higher temperatures, prompting further fusion. This then generates
neutrons to fuse the lithium in the fuel.

\subsubsection{bits to add in}
Information barriers can be used which would confirm the agreed amount
of radioactive material is correct in the container. These barriers
would be separately built by each country.  Main Objectives Before
dismantlement the total quantities of weapons grade plutonium and
uranium need to be determined for each NWS.  Dismantle process begins
with the warheads being split into their individual components which
include the arming or firing mechanism, the primary physics package,
the secondary physics package.  The warhead needs to be destroyed by
crushing the part until it is rendered militarily useless.
Weapons-grade plutonium is 93.5\% Pu-239 and 6\% Pu-240 whereas
reactor grade plutonium is 58\% Pu-239 and 24\% Pu-240. TODO:CITATION
Ideal conditions for a transparent international dismantlement
facility would include a neutron source that could obtain the mass of
plutonium or uranium used to an accuracy of 5\%, and would log this
separately for each weapon.  The facility would ideally be brand new
and observed under construction and shown to have no basements. This
means the facility could be checked for nuclear material before a
weapon’s dismantlement began.  Care is needed when handling hazardous
materials such as beryllium.

\section{Political Background}
\subsection{Treaties}
After Second War of World, people started to realise that nuclear
weapons are too powerful, dangerous and needed to be controlled. They
started to develop constraint for development of nuclear weapons.  The
most general one of these is the NPT (Non-Proliferation
Treaty). \citep{unoda} The NPT is an international treaty whose goal
is to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons and weapons technology, to
promote cooperation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and to
further the goal of achieving nuclear disarmament and general and
complete disarmament.  Opened for signature in 1968, the Treaty
entered into force in 1970.  On 11 May 1995, the Treaty was extended
indefinitely.

America and Russia played important roles in the global nuclear
disarmament act as they have the most nuclear weapons. The starting
point of such act can be chase back to 1969, The Strategic Arms
Limitation Talks, known as SALT.

The Strategic Arms Limitation Talks refers to two rounds of bilateral
talks and corresponding international treaties involving the United
States and the Soviet Union--the Cold War superpowers--on the issue of
armament control.

Negotiations commenced in Helsinki, Finland, in 1969. SALT I led to
the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty and an interim agreement between the
two powers. \citep{burr2001} SALT II resulted in an agreement in 1979,
but however the United States chose not to execute the treaty due to
the invasion towards Afghanistan by the Soviet Union, which happened
later in the year. The US withdrew from the treaty in the year 1986.

The above incidents lead to the birth of START treaty (Strategic Arms
Reduction Treaty). \citep{startI} START was a bilateral treaty between
the United States of America and the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics (USSR) on the Reduction and Limitation of Strategic
Offensive Arms. The treaty was signed on 31 July 1991 and entered into
force on 5 December 1994.  The treaty barred its signatories from
deploying more than 6,000 nuclear warheads atop a total of 1,600
ICBMs, submarine-launched ballistic missiles, and bombers. START
negotiated the largest and most complex arms control treaty in
history, and its final implementation in late 2001 resulted in the
removal of about 80 percent of all strategic nuclear weapons then in
existence. Proposed by United State President Ronald Reagan, it was
renamed START I after negotiations began on the second START treaty.

United States President George H. W. Bush and Russian President Boris
Yeltsin signed START II on 3 January 1993, banning the use of multiple
independently targetable reentry vehicles (MIRVs) on intercontinental
ballistic missiles (ICBMs). \citep{startII} It is not currently in
effect. On 14 June 2002, Russia withdrew from the treaty in response
to U.S. withdrawal from the ABM Treaty. The Anti-Ballistic Missile
Treaty (ABM Treaty or ABMT) was a treaty between the United States and
the Soviet Union on the limitation of the anti-ballistic missile (ABM)
systems used in defending areas against missile-delivered nuclear
weapons. Signed in 1972, it was in force for the next 30 years until
the US unilaterally withdrew from it in June 2002. \citep{burr2001}

START III was aiming to reduce the deployed nuclear weapons arsenals
of both countries and to continue the weapons reduction efforts that
had taken place in the START I and START II
negotiations. \citep{startIII} The negotiation started in 1997,
however, the treaty was never signed because negotiations broke down.

Strategic Offensive Reductions Treaty (SORT), also known as the Treaty
of Moscow, was a strategic arms reduction treaty between the United
States and Russia that was in force from June 2003 until February 2011
when it was superseded by the New START treaty. \citep{USRussia} At
the time, SORT was positioned as ``representing an important element
of the new strategic relationship'' between the two countries with
both parties agreeing to limit their nuclear arsenal to between 1700
and 2200 operationally deployed warheads each. It was signed in Moscow
on 24 May 2002. After ratification by the U.S. Senate and the State
Duma, SORT came into force on 1 June 2003. It would have expired on 31
December 2012 if not superseded by New START. Either party could have
withdrawn from the treaty upon giving three months written notice to
the other.

New START was signed on 8 April 2010 in Prague and, after
ratification, entered into force on 5 February 2011. It is expected to
last at least until 2021. \citep{USAtoday} New START is a follow-up to
the START I treaty, the proposed START II treaty, and the START
III. Under terms of the treaty, the number of strategic nuclear
missile launchers will be reduced by half. A new inspection and
verification regime will be established, replacing the SORT
mechanism. It does not limit the number of operationally inactive
stockpiled nuclear warheads that remain in the high thousands in both
the Russian and American inventories.

The new inspection and verification regime can be build based on the
Trilateral Initiative. \citep{zarimpas2003} TODO: NEEDS HELP/SENSE HERE This was a six-year
(1996--2002) effort to develop a verification system under which
Russia and the United States could submit classified forms of
weapons-origin fissile material to International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) verification and monitoring in an irreversible manner and for
an indefinite period of time.

\subsection{Information barrier technology}
The process of dismantlement verification involves large amount of
classified information. The NPT (Non-Proliferation Treaty) specified
that it is illegal to reveal nuclear weapon information to other
country. But in order a have a confident dismantlement result, some
certain classified information must be accessed. Is there a way of
conducting a confident dismantlement process without revealing any
classified information? TODO: WHY A FUNNY QUESTION HERE

In the past, such requirement was achieved by exchanging less
information, restricted on-site inspection and so on. But these extra
constrains not only made the inspection process very complicated and
long, but also reduced the confidence level of the inspection.

The Trilateral Initiative looked into a concept called ``Information
Barriers''. The Information Barriers are closed devices consisting of
computers without long term memories. It would permit unrestricted
measurements on a secure basis. The results would be compared to
unclassified parameters in a way that questions could be answered in a
pass-fail manner. \citep{SUW2005} For example, the measured ratios of
the key isotopes would be compared to a limit. If less than the limit,
the answer would be ``pass'', and conversely, if greater than the
limit, then ``fail''. An information barrier system that accepted by
both the host and the inspecting country can be extremely useful in
the verification process. It simplifies the whole inspection process
and increases the confidence level. Most importantly, it prevents the
transmission of classified information to inspectors.

%\begin{figure}
%  \includegraphics[width=\linewidth]{pile01/summer.png}
%  \caption{Theory of information barriers}
%\end{figure}

In the past years, people have done quite a lot of reach on
information barriers. The AWE plc on the UK side and the Institute for
Energy Technology and the Norwegian Defence Research Establishment on
the Norwegian side have developed initial designs for a limited
prototype device for use on a radiological source. And it has been
used in an experiment conducted between Norway and UK.

In June 2009, the UK and Norway went through a full-scale exercise
mocking up non-nuclear state verification of nuclear warhead
dismantlement.  During the experiment, the mock weapon was in a
container -- the inspectors could only see the red/green light on the
black box located on a table next to the weapon container. The light
turned green after roughly 30 minutes, indicating the presence of the
mock fissile material. This means that advanced seals need to be
placed on the container.

The concept of information barriers can be extended to cover the whole
inspection process. Each area of the inspection process can have a
uniquely designed information barrier system. Examples include:
\begin{itemize}
  \item Using Hash functions in the case of exchanging sensitive
    information. \citep{knuth1976} TODO: VAGUE
  \item Using different kinds of information barrier systems for
    different kind of detecting methods.
  \item Placing the nuclear weapon in separate room from the
    inspectors.
\end{itemize}
There is also a kind of information barrier specially
designed for the on-site inspection.

The design of the information barriers should obey the following
principles:
\begin{enumerate}
  \item Only the information needed will be accessed without any
    possibility of leaking out. E.g. In the inspection activity of
    TTBT (Threshold Test-Ban Treaty), both sides uses the CORRTEX
    (Continuous Reflectometry for Radius versus Time
    Experiments). \citep{deupree1981} They all agreed that the initial
    stage of the nuclear explosion is confidential, so they eliminated
    information contained in the first 15 micro seconds. This kind of
    system is called AID (Anti-intrusiveness device).
  \item The information barrier system should be strong, simple and
    cheap, capable of recognising a radiological source (representing
    the warhead) to a specified level of confidence, based on agreed
    attributes.
  \item The information barrier system should be designed in a way
    that information contained within in it cannot be modified or pass
    to other party.
  \item The information barriers should be something ``that will be
    credible and mutually acceptable to all parties under future
    disarmament treaties''. \citep{shultz2007}
\end{enumerate}

TODO:questions
As mentioned above, the information barrier system
needs to be credible and mutually accepted. Most likely, the
information barriers are designed by the host. How could the
inspection side be sure that it's the actual system that they are
looking for? How could they be sure that the data contains in the
system meets the requirement? This suggests that the information
barrier system itself needs a verification process. It will only work
once it passes the verification process.

Possible methods of achieving this are:
\begin{enumerate}
  \item The host should guarantee that the information barrier system
    is reliable and provide accurate measurements. The design of the
    system meets the requirements and it does not contain any hidden
    switch.
  \item The host should have few sets of identical system that could
    be randomly chosen by the inspection side. For those expensive
    systems, they should at least have few sets of the key hardware
    parts that can be randomly chosen.
  \item Run tests on some well known templates.
\end{enumerate}

The success of the information barriers makes the dismantlement
process reliable and efficient. It resolved lots of thorny problems in
the past years. So, the development of the information barrier system
is extremely important to nuclear disarmament. It should be one of the
main priorities at this stage.

\subsection{Nick's Stuff}
The Verification process seeks to ensure consistency with declaration,
and that disarmament has been achieved with a degree of
irreversibility.  The challenge facing proponents of Nuclear
disarmament is to ensure that measures have been taken to safeguard
against a Nuclear Weapon State attempting to cheat against the
international agreements that have been put in place. The foundations
for confidence are essentially built upon two key principles:
Declaration and Verification. The interplay between the two is what
establishes the iterative development towards Nuclear disarmament;
because a more complete declaration can lead to greater confidence in
the verification, and successful verification can lead to a decision
to release a more complete declaration. However there is a third
consideration that mediates between the two and also governs what
should be done with the sensitive information that may emerge from the
verification measurements -- the ``information barrier''; the
foundations of which shall be discussed in section ??.
TODO: HELP ME! *Vomits*

What do we verify? -- Nick’s brief overview Nuclear warhead
dismantlement starts with the removal from warheads from the
deployment areas to the storage areas. The warheads are then
transported to the dismantlement facilities where the ``Physics
package'' is removed and then stored to await further
dismantlement. Lastly plutonium and Highly Enriched Uranium re-emerge
in an unclassified form ready for final disposition.

\begin{figure*}
  \includegraphics[width=\linewidth]{pile01/nickpit1.png}
\end{figure*}

TODO: *Puke*
[dismantlement process.png] [Fig ?? : accompanying text] [Global
  Fissile Material Report 2009: A Path to Nuclear Disarmament, IPFM
  Annual report, Acton et al., p67] Verification may take place at any
point along this chain. A Nuclear Weapon State may declare numbers and
types of weapons in storage sites for example, and it is the job of
the inspector to confirm or refute this information.  However
inspectors do not enjoy the unrestricted right to freely examine the
weapons; they must do so behind the veil of an information barrier
because the act of inspection incurs the risk of spreading weapon
information.

\subsubsection{Information barrier}
In support of several ratified and pending nuclear material control
agreements, technical representatives from the US and Russia have
recognised the necessity for assurances against the release of
sensitive information to be put in place.  The majority of these
agreements involve storing nuclear materials and components from
stockpile weapons within specially designed containers.

Strategies for monitoring the agreements include measuring the neutron
and gamma radiation signature to verify declared attributes of the
plutonium or HEU.  If these measurements are accurate enough to serve
for this verification purpose, then they are accurate enough to
contain information about the design of the component being
monitored. Subsequently safeguards have been designed to prevent the
disclosure of that information. Hardware, software and procedural
measures containing the sensitive data will only present the relevant
results required for verification.

TODO: *Bloody* [Progress in Gamma Ray Measurement Information Barriers
  for Nuclear Material Transparency Monitoring'', Wolford and White,
  Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory Library, 2000] In the
interest of transparent monitoring, inspectors may witness or perform
restricted measurements on controlled items. The information barrier
is designed to mitigate the intrusiveness of taking these
measurements, and the proliferation knowledge it would pass on to the
inspector. Wolford and White (2000) TODO: This is a CITATION!
highlighted three objectives that hardware, software, and human
procedures should fulfil in order to be an effective information
barrier: ``Prevent the unintended release of sensitive information
during an inspection; Display a simple but reliable and useful result
to the inspector; Allow checks on the integrity of the internal
operations not visible during an inspection.''  However in applying
the barrier, the person monitoring may lose the assurance that the
internal operations proceeded as intended. Fortunately it can be shown
that thoughtful design elements can help recover some of that lost
assurance for the human operator.

\subsubsection{Design Elements}
An actual information barrier must be adapted to the measurement
instrument it accompanies. However there are certain design elements
that must be implemented no matter what type of measurement is being
performed. The DoE--DoD information Barrier Working Group has provided
guidance for 10 design bases which, when grouped into functional
categories, fall into 3 top-level elements:
\begin{enumerate}
  \item ``A barrier to conceal the sensitive information gathered in a
    measurement, and from which the physical attributes of an
    inspected item are derived. This consists of some combination of
    hardware, software, and human procedures, and must work in both
    directions, shielding unintended signals originating both outside
    and inside the measurement system.
  \item A simplified display that indicates clearly the selected
    results of the measurements as defined in the agreement, and
    nothing more. Accordingly, the display should be no more complex
    than is necessary to convey the result to the inspector.
  \item Enough autonomy to compensate for the lack of a human
    operator, both in monitoring the measurement and in safeguarding
    the data. The instrument must assure the reliability of its own
    measurements as well as protect the data resident during an
    inspection. In the event of failure or signs of tampering, this
    mechanisms should erase all traces of sensitive data from the
    instrument and halt the inspection.''  [ THE JOINT U.S. DOD-DOE
      INFORMATION BARRIER WORKING GROUP, Functional Requirements for
      Information Barriers, PNNL-13285, Pacific Northwest National
      Laboratory, Richland, WA, May 1999.]
\end{enumerate}

TODO: Both above and below
How do we verify? -- Nick’s Pit stuffing `Pit-stuffing' was developed
at Los Alamos National Laboratory to ensure that warheads that had
been internally evaluated to be unsafe would not accidentally go
off. Pit-Stuffing makes it possible to disable thousands of nuclear
warheads, quickly, cheaply, and irreversibly; in a verifiable manner.

\begin{figure*}
  \includegraphics[width=\linewidth]{pile01/nickpit2.png}
\end{figure*}

TODO: PITTTTTTT
[Pits.png Fig?? ] Figure 5.3. Storage arrangements for U.S. plutonium
warhead ``pits'' at the Pantex warhead dismantlement facility in
Amarillo, Texas.217 [Global Fissile Material Report 2009: A Path to
  Nuclear Disarmament, IPFM Annual report, Acton et al., p71] Modern
implosion-type nuclear weapons have a ``pit'' which is a hollow sphere
of plutonium or highly-enriched uranium, with a tiny tube through
which the tritium is passed into the hollow sphere. If an appropriate
material is fed in through this small tube until the inside of the pit
is ‘stuffed’, and the plutonium can no longer be compressed enough to
reach the critical mass to sustain a nuclear chain reaction as it
would encounter the fill on the way.
TODO: INSERT MORE SENSE

At Los Alamos there had been discussions as to what would be the most
suitable material. Aluminium powder and epoxy were suggested, however
powder could be made to fall back out the tube, and organic material
within the vicinity of plutonium could trigger chemical radiations and
thus threaten the safety.

The best considered option is to use bits of metal wire that are
shaped so that they cannot be removed via the fill tube.  If this were
achieved the only way to make the weapon functional again would be to
dismantle it, remove the pit and cut it open to take the wire out;
then re-manufacture the pit and reassemble the weapon. This would be
an expensive process, especially compared to the minimal time it takes
to fill the pit.  The physical act of stuffing the pit would about a
minute; therefore a single inspection visit could be very productive,
even if additional time is spent carrying out necessary safety
procedures.  Verifying that the pit had indeed been filled could be
confirmed by incorporating micro-curie quantities of cobalt-60 in the
stuffing wire. One set of gamma-ray counters aligned to view the pit
from one side would give a few simultaneous counts with another
gamma-ray detector orientated in a perpendicular direction.  This is
because cobalt-60 gives two simultaneous high-energy gamma rays. Such
measurements could not be mimicked by gamma-ray sources that are not
in the interior of the pit.  TODO:CITATION [R. Garwin,
  Technologies and procedures for verifying warhead status and
  dismantlement, Transparency in Nuclear Warheads and Materials: The
  Political and Technical Dimensions edited by Nicholas Zarimpas,
  2001] However further measures may have to be taken against the host
merely inserting minimal amounts of cobalt-60 without inserting the
wire, or semi-inserting the wire with a view to remove it after the
inspection. Also, because pit-stuffing depends on certain details of
warhead design and fabrication, it might not be an approach that can
be blindly administered.

The practicalities of this approach are encouraging for the cause of
verified dismantlement because of the speed and minimal cost. The
intrusiveness in principle could be low, if there was assurance that
the wire had been inserted and could not be removed. The host could
then be free to complete the dismantlement in privacy, removing the
need for foreign verification during transportation which is currently
a considerable expense.

After the dismantlement, the inspectors would return and be shown the
canisters containing the stuffed pits. Again a gamma-ray spectrum
could confirm that the containers enclosed hollow spheres of plutonium
stuffed with wire. The inspector could be very confident that these
were the same pits observed before the dismantlement as it would be
very expensive and cumbersome to manufacture thousands of hollow
plutonium spheres stuffed with wire.

TODO:CITATION 3 times [`Pit-Stuffing': How to Disable Thousands of
  Warheads and Easily Verify Their Dismantlement, Bunn, Federation of
  American Scientists Public Interest Report, volume 51, issue 2,
  pages 3-5, 1998] This method would work for US warheads, but needs
to be evaluated for Russian warheads that may have a different
design. [R. Garwin, Technologies and procedures for verifying warhead
  status and dismantlement, Transparency in Nuclear Warheads and
  Materials: The Political and Technical Dimensions edited by Nicholas
  Zarimpas, 2001] However pit-stuffing as a verification technique
might not get it’s opportunity to be utilised because of the asymmetry
between the sensitivity of classified items between Russia and the
US. The years 2000-2002 saw dramatic global change, including the
changing of American and Russian leaders. This meant that the
enthusiasm for implementing Initiatives negotiated in the late 1990s
was not sustained. The Russian Federation decided that it would melt
its pits into 2-kilogram balls and pack two plutonium balls into each
specialised AT-400R container before submitting the material for
U.S. or IAEA verification. The US and Japan provided AT-400R's are the
standard containers designed for Russia's Mayak Fissile Material
Storage facility. Russia maintained that the isotopic composition of
its weapon plutonium in the 2-kg balls was classified. [Global Fissile
  Material Report 2008, p. 70]

Although political decisions on declarations might stand in the way of
pit-stuffing as a universal verification technique, further work*
could be done to address some of the technical issues discussed as it
could prove to be a useful tool to verify the US.

*(perhaps similar to the UK Norway Initiative Workshop on Nuclear
Disarmament Verification 7-9 December 2011) Example: Information
Barrier for Gamma Ray Measurements Gamma ray measurements can infer a
lot of information about the object being measured including,
constituents abundances, a lower bound for the masses, and the amount
of intervening material. Also in a neutron-emitting source such as
plutonium, the presence of other elements can be inferred from the
evidence of activation products. Clearly much of this information lies
outside that demanded of transparency agreements and fortunately a
full spectrum is not required to derive the most useful attributes.

Programmers have an opportunity to protect most of the information. At
LLNL software was created that used plutonium lines between 630 KeV
and 670 KeV to compute a ratio of 240Pu to 239Pu which distinguishes
weapon-grade plutonium from non-weapon grade. The tool, called Pu600,
was adapted and enhanced for the requirements of the Trilateral
Initiative and the FMTT program. Programmers at LLNL developed similar
methods called Pu300 for determining the time since separation, and
Pu900 for determining the amount of oxide present in a sample.

\begin{figure}
  \includegraphics[width=\linewidth]{pile01/nickpit3cropped.png}
  \caption{Plot of the gamma ray spectrum from a non-sensitive sample
    of plutonium containing several isotopes and decay products. The
    details illustrate the relatively narrow subintervals containing
    the spectral lines used in the attribute calculations known as
    Pu300, Pu600 and Pu900 respectively. (\emph{Plot courtesy of
      Thomas~B.~Gosnell, LLNL})}
\end{figure}

[Progress in Gamma Ray Measurement Information Barriers for Nuclear
  Material Transparency Monitoring", Wolford and White, Lawrence
  Livermore National Laboratory Library, 2000] [Fig??: The gamma ray
  spectrum for a non-sensitive sample of plutonium containing several
  isotopes and decay products. The three narrow intervals of spectral
  lines are what is used in the attribute calculations Pu 300, Pu600
  and Pu900.] TODO:CITATION

\subsubsection{Ideas for conclusion}
The United States has stated the need to protect the host's warhead
design information overrules the need to provide confidence to the
inspecting party regarding the accuracy and reproducibility of the
measurements; in case an inspection is carried out in the absence of
any agreement to share classified nuclear weapon design.

We could recommend that this shouldn't be the case for Non-Nuclear
weapons states like Iran, where their proliferation information is
obviously less developed than that of the US or Russia.  Talking about
info barrier.. The greatest potential for improvement in the
transition from generic laboratory instrumentation to more special
purpose inspection equipment, and the greatest challenge is to move
away from stored programs and microprocessors towards pure hardware
solutions.  The technology of information barriers is primitive
compared to the technology of radiation detection and data
reduction. Nevertheless, relatively simple systems such as those
described above and in the references have provided sufficient
assurance to sustain negotiations. The specific implementation of an
information barrier system will depend on the requirements of the
inspection regime. Nevertheless the three elements introduced here
will always form its basis. More specific design influences include
decisions about equipment origin and custody and the number and type
of physical attributes to be collected.  [Progress in Gamma Ray
  Measurement Information Barriers for Nuclear Material Transparency
  Monitoring'', Wolford and White, Lawrence Livermore National
  Laboratory Library, 2000] TODO:CITATION

The treaty should challenge the Host facility to demonstrate
compliance: The emphasis of the verification procedure needs
changing. Consider a Nuclear Weapon State that intends to cheat the
disarmament agreements that are in place. ``Winning'' if them is if
they manage to fool the inspector. TODO:INSERT SENSE However if the
onus were on host, it would be their duty to convince the inspector
they are abiding by the agreements; for the cheat ``winning'' would be
managing to convince the inspector. This approach addresses the
underlying psychology between inspector and host facility more
positively.

\section{Overall Process}
\subsection{Dismantlement}
A joint exercise between UK and Norway described a possible
dismantlement and verification process was conducted near Oslo in
2009. A \( \mathrm{^{60}Co} \) sample was used to mimic a physics
package. A single nuclear weapon was moved into a dismantlement
facility, where screwdrivers were used to open a side panel and remove
the physics package. It was placed in a separate container. Everyone
entering or leaving the dismantlement room was checked for radioactive
material. Inspectors then confirmed that radioactive material was
present in the container. It was stored overnight in a sealed room
with CCTV surveillance. Seals used on items were of low
technology. The doors on the overnight storage room had a purple
adhesive down the hinge which would change colour if disturbed. The
adhesive strip itself was identifiable with a cluster of glitter
suspended in transparent glue. Upon application and removal of the
adhesive strip, the glue tag was photographed to check if it had been
replaced; the exact configuration of suspended pieces of glitter would
be near impossible to replicate. A simple technology like this seemed
to provide a reliable way of detecting alteration on a door or package
seal. The following day the physics package was moved to the ``hot
cell'' where it was dismantled. Using an ``information barrier''
device, the amount of material in the package can be measured without
revealing the quantity to the inspectors. It gives a green light if
the result was the same as the last measurement. Both countries
independently developed and built their own detectors. Using this
method the package could be inspected at multiple points to ensure
that no material had been siphoned off. Once the weapon had been
dismantled the nuclear material is taken away for
storage. \citep{dismantleBBC2009}

\begin{figure}
  \includegraphics[width=\linewidth]{pile01/ralph1.png}
	\caption{NEED CAPTION HERE :P \citep{dismantleBBC2009}}
\end{figure}

The magazine transparency system is a proposed method of storage to
monitor and maintain the inventory of a ``magazine'', a storage area
containing nuclear warheads or nuclear fissile materials during
dismantlement verification operations.

\begin{figure}
  \includegraphics[width=\linewidth]{pile01/ralph2.png}
  \caption{A schematic of the Magazine Transparency System (MTS) 
    showing the primary components. \citep{gerdes2001}}
\end{figure}

A system like this has been demonstrated at the Pantex dismantlement
facility in Texas. The weapon itself has only passive tags and seals
placed upon it to eliminate problems associated with battery life. The
MagTag blanket is simply a tarp containing permanent magnets in random
orientations, so as to make it unique. The system has a high
resolution magnetometer to detect changes in the position or
characteristics of the blanket. The bar-code reader records the
bar-code on the seal of each container when the magazine is emptied or
filled. This data is stored on an integrated notebook computer which
can transmit to a central monitoring station. The RF receiver
transmits the unique RF tag number on each weapon/storage vessel to
the notebook. Low light video cameras also send video straight to the
notebook for processing. With all of this information, Gauss readings,
video, RF tag and so on, the notebook computer sends an ``all okay''
signal once every second assuming no anomalous activity is detected
from any of the sensors. The notebook computer records no Non
Proliferation treaty sensitive information.  In the event of anomalous
activity in an MTS during disarmament verification operations, the
notebook is immediately given to the inspectors who can determine what
kind of activity took place. \citep{gerdes2001}

Many weapons are dismantled without foreign verification by nuclear
weapon states.  This is done to reduce the size of the stockpile or to
dispose of older outdated weapons.  In the US, the national nuclear
security administration (NNSA) is ``responsible for the management and
security of the nation's nuclear weapons, nuclear nonproliferation,
and naval reactor programs'' \citep{gerdes2001} Part of this
management is weapon dismantlement. Design laboratories work with
production facilities to identify and mitigate any risks associated
with dismantling a particular design of weapon. A plan is formulated
to safely dismantle the weapon and it is taken to the Pantex Plant in
Texas. The time required to dismantle a warhead ranges from ``a few
days to a few weeks'' depending on the complexity of the
design.\citep{ourMissionNNSA} With the weapon dismantled, the high
explosives and other non-nuclear materials are processed on site at
Pantex and a few other facilities.  The special nuclear materials are
then dismantled at the Y-12 National Security Complex.
\citep{pantex2010} Here nuclear materials are down blended to reduce
the enrichment and render the uranium useless for military
application. Down blended uranium is then used to fuel nuclear power
plants. According to the department of energy 10\% of the electricity
used in the United States is produced using former Russian nuclear
weapons. \citep{dismantlementNNSA} Uranium ``pits'' that are not down
blended can be stored in a ``sealed insert'' system. Leak-tight
stainless steal vessels are placed into steel storage over pack drums.

\subsubsection{Down-Blending Uranium}
Down-blending is the opposite of enrichment; excess Highly-Enriched
Uranium (HEU) can be blended down to Low-Enriched Uranium (LEU), which
can then be used commercially in nuclear fuel. Natural uranium is
comprised of three main isotopes, U-234 which is 0.01\% by weight,
U-235 which is 0.71\% by weight and U-238 which is 99.28\% by weight.
Of the three naturally occurring constituents U-235 is the only
fissile isotope.  Uranium that is enriched enough to be used in
nuclear weapons is typically \(>\)90\% Uranium-235 whereas in
commercial reactors this enrichment is 3-5\% Uranium-235.  HEU is
defined by having a U-235 content of greater than 20\%. HEU can only
be used in nuclear weapons and in research reactors.

The surplus of HEU from dismantled nuclear weapons can be blended down
to LEU so that in can be used in commercial nuclear power plants. An
example of this is the Megatons to Megawatts Program converts
ex-Soviet WgU to fuel for U.S. commercial power reactors. From 1995 to
mid-2005, 250 tonnes of HEU (enough for 10\,000 warheads) was recycled
into LEU. The goal is to recycle 500 tonnes by 2013. The
decommissioning programme of Russian nuclear warheads accounted for
about 13\% of total world requirement for enriched uranium leading up
to 2008. \citep{uraniumEnrichment} The United States Enrichment
Corporation has been involved in the disposition of a portion of the
174.3 tonnes of HEU that the U.S. government declared as surplus
military material in 1996. Through the U.S. HEU Down-blending Program,
this HEU material, taken primarily from dismantled U.S. nuclear
warheads, was recycled into LEU fuel, used by nuclear power plants to
generate electricity.

In the process of blending down, HEU is to be blended to a
concentration of 3-5\% U-235 so that it is then LEU and can be used as
nuclear reactor fuel. For this purpose, there are two techniques that
can be implemented -- blending as uranyl nitrate solution and blending
as uranium hexafluoride. TODO: FORMULAE

Converting uranium into uranyl nitrate is considered appropriate to
produce LEU material.  When uranium is dissolved in nitric acid, an
aqueous solution of uranyl nitrate
[\(\mathrm{UO_2(NO_3)_2\,.\,}x\mathrm{H_2O}\)] is formed. The
preferred uranium compound used for this is \(\mathrm{U_3O_8}\) in
powder form, as it has a high surface-area-to-volume ratio, thus
enhancing dissolution. The rate at which uranium is fed into the
process can be monitored and metered allowing the whole reaction to be
well regulated.

This process can produce a wide variety of compounds of purified
uranium. When LEU is required for waste disposal by way of
downblending procedures, the mixed LEU UN solution is converted to
\(\mathrm{U_3O_8}\). The concentrated LEU UN solution is then
thermally decomposed to produce \(\mathrm{UO_3}\), which can then be
oxidised producing impure LEU \(\mathrm{U_3O_8}\) powder.

The downblended LEU produced (either UNH crystal or
\(\mathrm{U_3O_8}\)) is packaged and delivered to either a reactor
fuel fabrication facility or a LLW disposal site. In the United States
the U.S. Department of Transportation (DOT) allows these LEU compounds
to be shipped overland in approved packaging containers.

Uranium into uranium hexafluoride is the other process achievable for
downblending.  The \(\mathrm{UF_6}\) blending process described here
is favoured for diluting the U-235 isotope abundance in HEU being
blended for use as reactor fuel.

If subsequent blending operations are to be performed, any excess HEU
feed material needs to be converted to \(\mathrm{UF_6}\), as most of
the surplus HEU being downblended for use as reactor fuel will be
either in oxide compounds or metal form. No fluorination process is
required for the diluent stream, as low-concentration
\(\mathrm{UF_6}\) can easily be made available from previously
existing inventories and domestic facilities.

In order to convert uranium metal and oxide compounds into
\(\mathrm{UF_6}\), many methods can be employed. One such method
uses two separate hydrofluorination and fluorination
reactions to convert \(\mathrm{UO_2}\) into
\(\mathrm{UF_6}\). Provided they are first processed for conversion to
\(\mathrm{UO_2}\), this method can also be used for uranium metal and
\(\mathrm{UO_3}\).

Hydrofluorination is the first step of this process, and it occurs in
a fluid bed reactor where hydrogen fluoride (HF) is reacted with the
\(\mathrm{UO_2}\) resulting in the production of uranium tetrafluoride
\(\mathrm{(UF_4)}\):
\[ \mathrm{ UO_2 + 4HF \rightarrow UF_4 + 2 H_2O } \]
Fluorination is the second step, and this occurs in a vertical tower
reactor where fluorine \(\mathrm{(F_2)}\) is reacted with
\(\mathrm{UF_4}\), producing \(\mathrm{UF_6}\):
\[ \mathrm{ UF_4 + F_2 \rightarrow UF_6 } \]
There is a series of cold `traps' in the equipment for capturing the
\(\mathrm{UF_6}\) gas and it can be sublimed into a solid. Any gaseous
\(\mathrm{UF_6}\) that gets past these cold traps is caught by sodium
fluoride (NaF) trap.

Both hydrofluorination and fluorination produce exhaust substances,
which are passed through a further series of filters in order to trap
any remaining HEU material. The substances passing through these
filters is carefully monitored to verify the absence of uranium and in
order to prevent any HF or \(\mathrm{F_2}\) from being released the
exhaust substances are then scrubbed with potassium hydroxide (KOH).

There is also a single, direct fluorination method that allows to
conversion of Uranium metal into \(\mathrm{UF_6}\). The uranium metal
is sealed in a tube furnace with a gaseous mixture of \(\mathrm{F_2}\)
and a diluent such as nitrogen. The heat from the furnace initiates
the fluorination reaction, but excess \(\mathrm{F_2}\) must be added
for the reaction temperature to be sustained:
\[ \mathrm{ U + 2F_2 \rightarrow UF_4 } \]
The \(\mathrm{UF_6}\) gas is then collected and the exhaust gases
filtered as in the two-step hydrofluorination/fluorination method
described previously. \citep{dilutingUranium}

\subsubsection{Storage of Fissile materials/nuclear weapons}
Assuming confidence in the dismantlement of a warhead, for real
progress to made, storage is important. Fissile nuclear materials,
especially of the weapons-grade variety, need to be stored under
international or bilateral monitoring, to prevent the construction of
new weapons and also safeguard against theft.

\subsubsection{MPC+A, Material Protection Control and Accounting}
This program is an example of bilateral efforts to safely and securely
store nuclear materials. Funded initially by the DoD and then by the
DoE, its goal was to improve security on hundreds of buildings at 40
sites in Russia to prevent theft or loss of nuclear materials. 600
tons of material was found to be at ``risk''. in 2001, a report
detailed that so far 81 buildings housing 81 tons of fissile material
had received upgraded security systems. In 1998 the program was
predicted to finish upgrading the storage facilities by
2020. \citep{y12}

\subsection{Chain of Custody}
Chain of custody refers to the system of routines used to provide a
high confidence level that a nuclear warhead will be delivered from
its field deployment or storage location to the dismantlement facility
and that the recovered nuclear material will be monitored until its
disposal to make sure that it will not be reused
\citep{zarimpas2003}. Chain of custody includes the use of photography
(X-ray or gamma ray images, optical pictures), seals and tags, visual
surveillance or video, warhead authentication (detection and
confirmation of nuclear or non-nuclear warhead) and information
processing (data transmission and relay, data compression, encryption
and decryption etc.). There are two categories of chain of custody:
limited chain of custody of a specific dismantlement facility and full
range chain of custody with continuous knowledge of the disarmament
process and the total number of nuclear warheads. \citep{wuwen2004}

\subsubsection{Seals and Tags}
A tag is a unique characteristic (`fingerprint') of an object or
container that is used to unambiguously identify it. A seal or
tamper-indicating device is a device or material that records
unauthorised access and leaves inerasable evidence behind. There are
two categories of modern seals: passive and active. Passive seals do
not need electrical power to work and they are inexpensive but they
can only be used once. Active or dynamic seals require electrical
power to work, either internally or externally. They are more
expensive than passive seals but they are typically reusable.
\citep{nuclearTamperSeals2001}

Seals used in verification of nuclear disarmament need some unique
attributes such as transparency and negotiability. If the inspected
facility provides and controls the seals, then the inspectors will be
suspicious and think that the seals have been tampered with. If the
inspectors provide and control the seals, then the inspected facility
will worry about espionage devices such as microphones being embedded
in the seals. High tech electronic seals could be less comfortable to
both parties due to tampering, safety and espionage concerns. Also
some weapon containers cannot accommodate extra seals so the seals for
nuclear disarmament will have to coexist with seals for safeguards and
internal security. \citep{nuclearTamperSeals2001}

Current technologies and technologies under development:
\citep{zarimpas2003}
\begin{description}
  \item[VACOSS fibre optic seal] \hfill \\ The first IAEA electronic
    seal which consists of a loop of fibre optic cable that is
    actively checked for integrity by the seal’s electronic
    system. Remote reading of the seal is also possible. They are no
    longer supported by the manufacturer and are being replaced by the
    EOSS seal which is more secure. \citep{IAEAsafeguards2011}
  \item[Electronic Optical Sealing System (EOSS)] It is intended for
    long duration surveillance with high reliability. It uses a seal
    for enhanced authentication, smart power management system, tamper
    indication and encryption. A tamper indicating enclosure protects
    the electronics and a microwave foil protects the complete housing
    against drilling. It can be coupled with surveillance systems and
    can be remotely interrogated. \citep{IAEAsafeguards2011}
  \item[Reflective Particle Tags (RPT)] \hfill \\ Reflective particles
    are mixed into glue that is applied to the object being tagged. If
    the tag is illuminated by a point light source, particle
    reflections form a unique pattern to that tag and incident
    angle. A tag reader records the pattern of individual pictures
    using a camera and forms a set of fingerprints unique to that
    tag. The object can be uniquely identified by reading its
    tag. \citep{ellis2007}
  \item[Ultrasonic Intrinsic Tags (UIT)] \hfill \\ A sample is scanned
    ultrasonically and a hand-held scanner collects sub-surface
    structure data. A computer performs the alignment and correlation
    functions. These tags are resistant to surface changes and
    counterfeit.
  \item[Surface feature tags] \hfill \\ A unique fingerprint of an
    item by examining its surface using scanning electron microscopy,
    holographic interferometry and micro-videography.
  \item[Shrink-wrap seals] \hfill \\ They consist of a plastic film
    that shrinks tightly around the safeguarded object. A unique
    pattern is produced by multiple layers of geometrically patterned
    film and it’s photographed for verification.
  \item[Cobra seals] \hfill \\ Consist of a loop of fibre optic cable
    and a polycarbonate sealing body. A unique light pattern is
    created when a blade cuts the cable. The Cobra seal reader
    photographically records this unique pattern and uses it for
    future comparison.
  \item[E-type cup wire loop seals] \hfill \\ Consist of two metal
    cups which snap together and cover the crimped ends of a wire
    loop. The inside of the cups are covered with melted solder and
    this is scratched to create a unique pattern that is recorded for
    future comparisons.
  \item[E-tag mechanical seals] \hfill \\ Similar to E-type cup wire
    loop seals but also contain an electronic chip that contains a
    unique identification number that can be verified without opening
    the seal.
  \item[Pressure-sensitive adhesive seals] \hfill \\ Use
    pressure-sensitive adhesives to attach fragile labels to an
    object. Unique reflective patterns are created by microscopic
    glass beads.
  \item[T-1 Radio-Frequency seals and tags] \hfill \\ Consists of a
    fibre optic seal, case tamper switches, motion detector and low
    and high temperature indicators.
  \item[Acoustic tags] \hfill \\ Based on the unique resonant
    properties of an object when scanned using sound waves of a
    specific frequency.
  \item[Radio-Frequency (RF) tags] \hfill \\ Emits a unique
    identification number and can be scanned using a RF device.
  \item[VNIIEF smart bolts] \hfill \\ A small reader is used to read
    the unique electrical properties and the digital identification of
    the seal. The electrical properties of the bolt change if it’s
    unscrewed and that indicates tampering.
\end{description}

\subsubsection{Vulnerability of seals}
All seals appear to be vulnerable to simple, rapid, low tech
attacks. Attacking a seal means to trying to gain access to whatever
the seal is protecting without being detected. Defeating a seal means
opening the seal without being detected or leaving evidence of entry,
or repairing any damage and erasing evidence of entry, or replacing
the entire seal or parts of it with counterfeits. The most
comprehensive seal vulnerability study has been undertaken by the
Vulnerability Assessment Team (VAT) at the Los Alamos National
Laboratory. They analysed 94 different seals and defeated them for a
total of 132 times. All of the defeats were implemented using low tech
attacks with tools and supplies that in some cases can be easily
carried in a person's pockets. The time taken for successful attacks
varied from 3 seconds for several seals to 125 min for the most
difficult seals. The mean time taken to complete the 132 defeats was
4.3 min and the mean cost of the defeats was
\$56. \citep{vulnSecSeals1997}

\subsubsection{Surveillance technologies}
Surveillance is another important element in the chain of custody and
comprehensive surveillance can also increase the security status of
the monitored nuclear warheads. Comprehensive surveillance provides a
high confidence in the dismantlement process and establishes mutual
trust between the involved countries. Comprehensive surveillance
combined with seals and tags can constitute an in depth inspection
system. Several technologies can be used for comprehensive
surveillance such as video monitoring, sensor monitoring, photograph
comparing, intrusion detection and satellite
imaging. \citep{wuwen2004}

Video monitoring is widely used in international safeguards and
domestic security and it plays an important role in preventing illegal
activities and proving treaty compliant activities. It is one of the
most widely used containment and surveillance techniques by the
IAEA. \citep{wuwen2004} Modern digital imaging used by the IAEA
includes single camera digital surveillance units such as the
All-in-one System (ALIS), All-in-one Portable System (ALIP), Digital
Single Camera Optical Surveillance System (DSOS) and multi-camera
digital surveillance systems such as the Server Digital Image
Surveillance System (SDIS) and the Digital Multi-camera Optical
Surveillance System (DMOS). These systems were developed to replace
aging videotape based systems and the SDIS can be used for remote and
unattended operation. The General Advanced Review Station Software
(GARS) was developed to review all digital image surveillance records
of the IAEA using a desktop
computer. \citep{equipmentIAEAinspectors2002} The newest system is the
Next Generation of Surveillance System (NGSS) and it will be used in
2012. It is scalable to any number of cameras, has solid state storage
media, low power consumption, advanced security features and is highly
reliable under harsh environmental conditions. It can be configured as
a single all-in-one camera system or as a scalable multi-camera
system. It supports various trigger signals from electronic seals and
sensors, high resolution and coloured images, remote monitoring and
picture taking rates of one image per second. Four different fields of
view can be recorded simultaneously by a single NGSS
camera. \citep{IAEAsafeguards2011}

\begin{figure}
  \includegraphics[width=\linewidth]{pile01/CoC1.png}
  \caption{Picture of the Next Generation of Surveillance System
    (NGSS) with 24 cameras \citep{IAEAsafeguards2011}.}
\end{figure}

Sensor monitoring is another effective method used to track and
authenticate nuclear warheads.  Various sensors such as
motion/acceleration, weight, acoustic, radioactive, magnetic, thermal,
temperature/humidity, impact force sensitive and vibration sensors can
be combined to monitor nuclear warhead reduction and provide a high
confidence. Most of these sensors are commercially available and can
be used in an integrated monitoring system which is easy to
understand, technically transparent and applicable by all
parties. \citep{wuwen2004}

Photograph comparing is used to carefully examine recorded images of
the objects being monitored and detect tamper activities. Drawing
random marks or images near the monitored object and then
photographing it from all angles can enhance the photograph comparing
method. It can easily raise disputes because it requires specific
interpretation, either algorithmic or artificial, and the picture
taking process can be also affected by environmental elements so it is
never used on its own. It is often embedded into tamper-indicating
monitoring methods and used as a complimentary technique in nuclear
disarmament. \citep{wuwen2004}

Intrusion detection is used in guarding nuclear warheads and uses
microwave, capacity sensitive, weight detection, infrared beam and
motion/acceleration sensors to detect unauthorised access. The
technologies and intrusion detection methods are being continuously
developed to increase the efficiency and reliability of intrusion
detection. \citep{wuwen2004}

Satellite imaging is used to detect change of large facilities or
objects and requires advanced space and electronic sensor
technologies. It can integrate visual, multi-spectra, synthesised
aperture radar (SAR), thermal/infrared and other photographic
technologies into a comprehensive system to provide a meaning full
picture of a specific area or object. \citep{wuwen2004}

\subsubsection{Vulnerability in chain of custody}
The Vulnerability Assessment Team (VAT) at the Los Alamos National
Laboratory has extensively researched issues associated with nuclear
safeguards in the areas of transport security, intrusion detection and
vulnerability assessments. \citep{nuclearSafeguardsAndSec2005}

Most organisations ignore or underestimate the security risk posed by
employees, also known as insider threat.
\citep{nuclearSafeguardsAndSec2005} Motivations for an insider attack
include revenge, greed, ideology, terrorism, social engineering or
even mental illness and periodic background checks should be used to
reduce the insider attacks. Common mistakes that organisations make
regarding the insider threat are thinking that low-level employees are
not a threat, not testing if employees can be bribed, thinking that
only employees are insiders and having overconfidence in the polygraph
test. \citep{insiderThreat2011} The IAEA does little or no background
checks on its employees either before or after hiring, including
nuclear inspectors. The IAEA must trust its inspector’s judgement on
whether treaty violations are occurring and the lack of background
checks puts the reliability of inspections at risk. Also IAEA
inspectors are granted diplomatic privileges and the position of an
inspector could attract people who want to exploit diplomatic status
for terrorist or criminal
activities. \citep{nuclearSafeguardsAndSec2005}

Another security risk is the fact that people are poor observers and
they don't realise it. Perceptual blindness, also known as
inattentional blindness, is the phenomenon of not being able to
perceive things which are in plain sight if you are focused on a
specific visual task. Change blindness, which is also a kind of
perceptual blindness, is the phenomenon of observers failing to notice
changes, including blatant changes, even when they are expected. This
has serious implications for inspectors and security guards who
inspect seals, watch video monitors, operate safeguards equipment and
guard gates. Inspectors and security guards should be educated and
trained on this and technology could be used to cover for perceptual
weaknesses in humans. \citep{insiderThreat2011}

Confusing inventory with security leads to bad security. Inventory is
counting and locating stuff and it can detect innocent errors by
insiders such as sending a shipment to the wrong location, but it’s
not designed to detect spoofing and deliberate nefarious attacks by
insiders or outsiders. \citep{handbookSecBlunders2010} Security is
meant to counter nefarious adversaries, both insiders and
outsiders. \citep{insiderThreat2011} Inventory systems should not be
used as security systems. Examples of inventory systems used as
security systems in nuclear safeguards include using the Global
Positioning System (GPS) for cargo security and using contact memory
buttons (CMBs) or radio frequency identification devices (RFIDs) for
nuclear material control and accounting
(MC\&A). \citep{handbookSecBlunders2010} Almost all nuclear
applications use the civilian GPS signals and not the military
signals.  The civilian GPS signals are unauthenticated, unencrypted so
they are not secure and were never meant to be used for security
applications. GPS receivers can be easily spoofed or jammed using
widely available commercial GPS satellite simulators which can be
easily purchased, rented or stolen. CMBs and RFIDs are very useful for
inventory but they are not designed to deal with nefarious
adversaries. They are very easy to lift, counterfeit, tamper with the
reader or spoof the reader from a
distance. \citep{nuclearSafeguardsAndSec2005} On the other hand
nuclear MC\&A may look like an inventory function since it involves
counting and locating nuclear assets but it is a security function
meant to detect nuclear theft, tampering, diversion or espionage.  A
nuclear MC\&A program or system should make significant attempts to
deter or detect spoofing by a nefarious
adversary. \citep{handbookSecBlunders2010}

\subsubsection{Unconventional approaches to chain of custody}

Conventional tamper detection methods are fundamentally flawed. A
conventional seal must store the information indicating that it has
been opened until it is inspected but it’s too easy to hide or erase
this information or even make a counterfeit seal. A much better
approach is to use the ``anti-evidence'' method. Information that
tampering has not occurred (the anti-evidence) is stored at the
beginning when the seal is first
installed. \citep{nuclearSafeguardsAndSec2005} If tampering is
detected, this information, which is usually 1 byte in length for
electronic anti-evidence seals, is being erased.
\citep{unconventionalCoC2010} The inspector will look for
anti-evidence during inspection and if it is missing or incorrect then
tampering has occurred. If the anti-evidence is intact then the seal
has not been opened. Only the people who installed the seal will get
to know the anti-evidence information, and it is different for each
seal. It even changes if the seal is reused. The attacker will not
know the anti-evidence information so he cannot counterfeit, erase or
hide anything. \citep{nuclearSafeguardsAndSec2005} It is also
theoretically possible for the inspected party to check the
anti-evidence seal and send the anti-evidence to the inspectors
without them being present there. \citep{unconventionalCoC2010} This
is very useful because inspectors might not be allowed to handle
nuclear material or weapons and might be limited to observing the
facility personnel installing or removing the seals. An example of an
anti-evidence seal is the Time Trap, shown in Figure~\ref{fig:CoC2},
which can be placed on the hasp of a door or container. It turns on
its liquid crystal display when entry has occurred and the display
will alternate between the time that the entry has occurred and the
hash for that time. Each time has a different hash and only the people
who installed it know the correct hash for future times. When the seal
detects entry, the future hash values are instantly erased so the
attackers cannot counterfeit the seal because they don't know what
hash it should display. \citep{nuclearSafeguardsAndSec2005}

\begin{figure}
  \includegraphics[width=\linewidth]{pile01/CoC2.png}
  \caption{Working Time Trap prototype showing entry occurring at
    13:22 on 3\textsuperscript{rd} February 2005. The picture on the
    left shows the time that intrusion was detected and the picture on
    the right shows the hash for that time. If the hash value is wrong
    or missing or the time is different by a few minutes, then
    tampering has occurred. An on-board programmable microprocessor
    controls this anti-evidence seal and the entire device cost
    \$8. \citep{nuclearSafeguardsAndSec2005}}
  \label{fig:CoC2}
\end{figure}

The anti-evidence method can be used for real-time monitoring of
nuclear material, including during transport and this approach is
called the ``Town Crier'' method. It does not send out an alarm when
intrusion is detected because the alarm signal can be easily blocked
or jammed. Instead it sends a periodic ``ALL OK'' byte called the
bingo number. Only the monitoring system and the people listening in
know the correct bingo number at any given time and if the bingo
number fails to arrive on time, it indicates trouble. The probability
of guessing one bingo number correctly is 1/256 (0.4\%) and the
probability of guessing two correctly is 1/65536 (0.002\%) so the
attackers cannot counterfeit the bingo number. It is a simple, low
cost method that uses a very low bandwidth of 1 byte per minute,
one-way communication and provides high security since attackers gain
nothing by blocking the signal. \citep{unconventionalCoC2010}

Another method that could be used is colorimetry because colour is
very difficult property to accurately reproduce. Inexpensive
commercial colour sensors can measure colour accurately and they can
be used as change detectors for seals. Inspectors could also use them
to check if the walls of a camera enclosure have been cut open, then
repaired and repainted to hide the
intrusion. \citep{unconventionalCoC2010}

\section{Detection Schemes}
\subsection{Background}

Nuclear warhead detectability is reliant upon 4 factors. These factors
are: the warhead design, the technique used for detection, the
sensitivity of the detectors, and any material between the warhead and
detector that functions as a shield for the
radiation. \citep{hippel1990}

In order for detectors to accurately identify special nuclear material
(SNM), they need to be able to accurately isolate the true signal (for
example, the gamma ray spectrum) from noise (background
radiation). That is, the detector needs to have a high signal-to-noise
ratio. A detector’s ability to obtain a true signal depends on its
efficiency and spectral resolution. \citep{medalia2007}

The efficiency of a detector is a measure of its ability to detect
radiation and the rate at which the detector is able to record
data. \citep{medalia2007,bushberg1994}. SNM emits radiation in all
directions; however its intensity decreases with distance. Therefore,
to improve efficiency, the detector should be large or close to the
SNM. It should also record data as fast as possible so as to reduce
the time spent waiting for the scan to take place. \citep{medalia2007}

Spectral resolution describes the sharpness of peaks in a gamma ray
spectrum. Since a radioactive isotope releases radiation at certain
energies, an ideal detector would record the spectrum as vertical
lines corresponding to those energies. However, detectors are not
ideal, thus the energy is recorded as a bell shaped curve. The closer
the curve is to a vertical line, the more beneficial the data
is. \citep{medalia2007}

The features of materials which allow them to be detected or
identified are:
\begin{enumerate}
\item Atomic Number and Density: The atomic number (Z) is the number
  of protons in the nucleus of the atom; it is unique to every
  element. Density is described as mass per unit volume. Plutonium has
  an atomic number which is slightly higher than uranium but its
  density varies from slightly more to slightly less than uranium.
  \citep{medalia2007}
\item Radioactivity: Atoms which are radioactive are unstable and give
  of different types of radiation in order to become stable. The types
  of radiation used in nuclear detection are gamma rays and
  neutrons. \citep{medalia2007} Gamma ray spectra are unique to each
  isotope, thus, it is fairly easy to determine the radiation that is
  emitted from an isotope.
\item Photon Opacity: The impenetrability of a material to a photon
  beam depends on three things: the amount of material presented to
  the path of the beam, the energy of the photons and the atomic
  number and density of the material. Gamma rays are able to travel
  through low Z materials without any problems, however, high Z
  materials absorb and deflect them. On the other hand, neutrons are
  able to pass easily through high Z materials but are absorbed and
  scattered by low Z materials.
\end{enumerate}

\subsubsection{Gamma Ray Detection}
Gamma rays are produced from within the nuclei of radioactive
atoms. \citep{bushberg1994} To detect gamma rays, a scintillation
detector is used. A scintillation detector consists of a scintillator
and photomultiplier tube (PMT). A scintillator is a material which
converts the energy deposited by the gamma ray into optical photons
(pulses of visible light). The optical photons are picked up by the
PMT which has two functions: conversion of the optical photons into an
electrical signal and amplification of the signal so that it can be
measured. The PMT consists of a photocathode, dynodes and an
anode. The photocathode emits electrons when struck by the optical
photons.  The electrons are attracted to the first dynode which
amplifies the electrons into more electrons that are then accelerated
to the second dynode which produces even more electrons, and the
process continues until the electrons reach the anode. This is done so
that a measurable current pulse can be detected. The voltage of the
current pulse is proportional to the number of low energy photons
which in turn is proportional to the energy of the gamma ray. Each
pulse height produced from the PMT is analysed by a device called a
Multi-Channel Analyser (MCA). When the MCA receives a voltage pulse,
it sorts it into a bin depending on the energy and increases the
counts in that particular bin by one. A histogram representing the
gamma ray spectrum of an isotope is then drawn based on the
information in the different bins. \citep{medalia2007,bushberg1994}

\begin{figure}
  \includegraphics[width=\linewidth]{pile01/ScintillationDetector.jpg}
  \caption{A scintillation detector. \citep{nucsafe}}
\end{figure}

An alternative detector which can be used to measure gamma rays is a
semi-conductor detector. A voltage is placed between two terminals on
opposite sides of the semiconductor crystal. \citep{bushberg1994} When
a gamma ray strikes the crystal, its energy is given to the electron
which is then able to escape from the crystal. The electron is then
attracted to the positive electrode. When enough electrons are able to
escape from the crystal, a current will flow. The electric current has
a voltage proportional to the energy of the gamma ray. The voltage is
then sorted into a bin in the same way as the scintillation
detector. \citep{medalia2007,bushberg1994}

\begin{figure}
  \includegraphics[width=\linewidth]{pile01/NeutronDetector.png}
  \caption{A neutron detector. \citep{nucsafe}}
\end{figure}

\subsubsection{Neutron Detection}

Neutrons are uncharged particles. To detect neutrons, helium-3, an
isotope of helium is a good material to use. A tube consisting of
helium-3 gas linked to a power supply is a conventional neutron
detector. The tube contains charged plated or wires that are positive
and negative. When a low energy neutron strikes the detector, it is
absorbed by a helium-3 atom.  Energetic charged particles are then
produced which lose their energy by knocking off other helium-3
atoms. Positively charged particles are attracted to the negative
plate and the electrons are attracted to the positive plate. This
movement causes a small electric current to be generated which is then
recorded. Neutron detection cannot be used to identify isotopes
because they do not have characteristic lines that correspond to
discrete energies and they lose energy as they interact with a low
Z-material, thus their spectra is blurred. \citep{bushberg1994}

\subsubsection{Passive Detection}

There are two techniques used for detection. These are passive and
active detection.The simplest detection method is passive detection
which involves detecting any and all radiation (gamma rays and
neutrons) that are spontaneously emitted by the
warhead. \citep{hippel1990} The advantages of passive detectors are:
they require less electrical output, they are not very expensive, they
are easy to build and do not add any additional health risks to
workers. However, they are not without their disadvantages. The major
disadvantage is that the signal emitted from a nuclear warhead needs
to be greater than the background signal in order for it to be
recognised. As a result, there is a very good chance that passive
detection systems can easily be fooled if the radioactive material is
shielded to prevent measurable amounts of radiation from reaching the
detector. \citep{nuclearDetArch2009}

The passive methods that are used to detect the presence of plutonium
depend on the emission of both neutrons and gamma rays from its
isotopes. The gamma rays emitted from the plutonium isotope are of
relatively low energy and attenuate greatly as they travel through the
warhead, thus gamma ray detection is not a reliable method to use. The
best technique to use is to look for neutrons emitted by the
plutonium-240 (Pu-240) isotope. The fissile isotope of plutonium is
plutonium-239 (Pu-239); however, Pu-240 is active also
\citep{drell1993}. This isotope spontaneously fissions and typically
emits about 106 neutrons per second with a characteristic energy of 1
MeV. \citep{drell1993} In spite of the attenuation that these neutrons
undergo as they travel through the warhead, approximately 10\% emerge
from the weapon and can be detected. It has been estimated that a
warhead containing 4kg of Pu-239 contaminated by 6\% of Pu-240 could
reliably be detected with a detector 1m from the warhead in only 1
second. \citep{drell1993} The most important advantage of using this
method is that a well-defined image of the warhead is not observed
because the neutrons are scattered repeatedly as they travel through
the weapon to the outside, thus only the grainiest geometrical
information is revealed. \citep{drell1993,drell1990} A drawback of
using this method is that the emerging neutrons can be shielded
without any difficulty. These factors suggest that this neutron
detection technique is best used in examinations in which nuclear
material is expected to be present, for example, to verify that the
warheads earmarked to be dismantled are indeed nuclear.

The passive detection of uranium can be carried out by measuring the
high energy gamma rays that are emitted from the uranium-238 (U-238)
isotope. U-238 emits about 1MeV hard gamma rays at the rate of about
7.5 per gram per second with 1MeV energy. \citep{drell1993} Depleted
uranium (almost all U-238) also emits gamma rays at this rate but HEU
emits gammas at a rate of 0.5 gammas per gram-second with 1MeV
energy. The amount of depleted uranium and HEU determines the amount
of gamma rays escaping from the warhead. When a simple model of a
nuclear warhead is used to estimate this flux, the result is about 100
gamma rays per second which is easily detectable.  \citep{drell1993}
The primary advantages of this technique are that the counting rate
(the number of gamma rays detected in a particular time) is generally
high. One disadvantage of this technique is that the radiation
signature of HEU is relatively small; hence it quickly
attenuates. \citep{nuclearMatDet} A second disadvantage is that U-238
is used for other applications in which a high Z material is
essential, therefore there could be a lot of false positives (from
U-238 used in something that is not a nuclear weapon) if the method
was used at questionable sites.

\subsubsection{Existing Detection Equipment}
The existing detection technologies available are:
\begin{enumerate}
\item Radiation Pagers: These are able to detect radiation at close
  distances. They are lightweight and inexpensive, but are unable to
  ascertain the source emitting the radiation. \citep{medalia2007}
\item Radioactive isotope identification devices: These devices are
  able to identify radioisotopes based on their gamma ray
  spectrum. These devices are mainly handheld but heavy and
  delicate. They need to be cooled with liquid nitrogen or by
  mechanical means, thus their usability in the field is limited. They
  have a relatively short range for detecting radiation sources with
  low radioactivity, notably shielded HEU, making them unsuitable as
  the primary method of screening cargo
  containers. \citep{medalia2007}
\item Radiation Portal Monitors: Many of these devices use large
  sheets of plastic scintillator material, such as polyvinyl toluene
  (PVT), to detect radiation coming from a vehicle.  However, PVT
  cannot identify the source of radiation. However, there are lots of
  items in everyday trade that contain radioactive material. As a
  result, some produce many false alarms, which may require
  considerable effort to resolve, delaying the flow of commerce.
  Newer versions have some isotope identification
  capability. \citep{medalia2007} They are primarily used for security
  purposes at checkpoints and borders. \citep{nuclearMatDet}
\end{enumerate}

\subsection{Active Detection}

\subsection{Muon Tomography}
\subsubsection{Cosmic Rays}
Cosmic rays are a flux of high energy particles that bombard the
earth’s atmosphere. They are produced in other parts of the universe
and approximately 98\% of these particles are protons or heavier
nuclei and 2\% are electrons. These cosmic rays collide with air
molecules and produce a shower of particles that include protons,
neutrons, electrons, positrons, photons, kaons and pions (both neutral
and charged). These particles interact by the nuclear and
electromagnetic forces to produce additional particles in a cascade
process. Pions will interact with air molecules via the strong force
but some will spontaneously decay via the weak force into a muon plus
a muon neutrino or an anti-muon neutrino. \citep{muonManual2005}
\[ \pi^+ \rightarrow \mu^+ + \overline{\nu}_\mu \]
\[ \pi^- \rightarrow \mu^- + \nu_\mu \]

\begin{figure}
  \includegraphics[width=\linewidth]{pile01/muon01.png}
  \caption{Cosmic ray cascade induced by a cosmic ray proton striking
    an air molecule nucleus. \citep{muonManual2005}}
\end{figure}

\subsubsection{Muons}
Muons are the most abundant charged particles at sea level. They are
produced high in the atmosphere, typically \unit{15}{\kilo\metre} and
lose about \unit{2}{\giga\electronvolt} before reaching the ground due
to ionisation. The mean energy of muons at the ground is
\unit{4}{\giga\electronvolt}. \citep{PDG2011} They interact with
matter via the weak and electromagnetic forces but not with the strong
force. They decay via the weak force into an electron plus an electron
neutrino or an anti-electron neutrino.
\[ \mu^- \rightarrow e^- + \overline{\nu}_e + \nu_\mu \]
\[ \mu^+ \rightarrow e^+ + \nu_e + \overline{\nu}_\mu \]

The muon flux at sea level is about
\unit{1}{muon\usk\rpsquare{\centi\metre}\usk\reciprocal\minute}
\citep{statisticalRec2007} or
\unit{10000}{muons\usk\rpsquare\metre\usk\reciprocal\minute}. They are
highly penetrating charged radiation.  A typical cosmic ray muon of
energy \unit{3}{\giga\electronvolt} can penetrate more than
\unit{1000}{\gram\usk\rpsquare{\centi\metre}} (e.g. 10 m of water). As
muons pass through matter they either scatter if they have high energy
or are absorbed if they have low energy. The angle at which they
scatter depends on the atomic number Z (number of protons) of the
material. As the atomic number of the material increases, the
scattering angle increases. In a layer \unit{10}{\centi\metre} thick,
a \unit{3}{\giga\electronvolt} muon will scatter with an angle of
\unit{2.3}{\milli\radian} in water, \unit{11}{\milli\radian} in iron
and \unit{20}{\milli\radian} in lead. \citep{Borozdin2003}

\subsubsection{Limitations of X-rays}
X-ray radiography is successful in many areas but has
limitations. X-rays are unable to penetrate dense objects that have a
high atomic number. Multiple projections are needed in order to
resolve a three-dimensional structure using X-rays and they also pose
health risks from radiation. In X-ray radiography, absorption and
scattering cause attenuation of the incident beam which determines the
intensity of an image pixel. The maximum mean free path of photons is
about \unit{25}{\gram\usk\rpsquare{\centi\metre}} for all materials
which corresponds to \unit{2}{\centi\metre} of lead.
\citep{Borozdin2003} Even the most penetrating gamma rays are
attenuated by an e-folding in \unit{2}{\centi\metre} of lead. A very
large incident dose of radiation is needed to penetrate thicker
objects and that is harmful for living organisms.
\citep{Priedhorsky2003} A different type of radiography must be used
for thicker objects and it must be based on the interaction of charged
particles with matter by multiple Coulomb scattering.
\citep{Borozdin2003}

\subsubsection{Muon tomography concept}
Muon tomography is based on the multiple Coulomb scattering of muons
as they pass through a material. Radiographs of objects of any
thickness can be produced by using multiple scattering.  Cosmic ray
muons are passive and harmless radiation and allow radiograph of dense
objects with no artificial dose of radiation such as X-rays or gamma
rays. The scattering of muons differs significantly in three different
groups of materials: low Z (water, plastic, concrete), medium Z (iron,
copper) and high Z (lead, tungsten, uranium). \citep{imageRec2004}
Each muon carries information about the objects it has penetrated and
the properties of these objects can be determined by measuring the
scattering of multiple muons. High Z objects can be detected amongst
typical low Z and medium Z objects. \citep{statisticalRec2007}

\begin{figure}
  \includegraphics[width=\linewidth]{pile01/muon02.png}
  \caption{Muon tomography concept. The grey tracks are the muons
    going through air and the black tracks are the muons that
    penetrate a dense object. \citep{statisticalRec2007}}
  \label{fig:muon02}
\end{figure}

The muon tomography concept is illustrated in
Figure~\ref{fig:muon02}. The position and angle of incoming muon
tracks are provided by a set of two or more planes of muon detectors
above and below the object. These detectors only detect vertically
oriented muons. Side detectors could be used to detect horizontally
oriented muons. The detectors above the object measure the position of
incident muons in two orthogonal coordinates. The scattering of the
muons that pass through the material depends on the type of the
object. The detectors below the object measure the positions and
angles of the scattered muons. The scattering angle of each muon is
calculated from the corresponding incident and scattered
measurements. The momentum is calculated from the slight scattering of
muons in the detectors themselves. \citep{statisticalRec2007}

\subsubsection{Simulations of muon tomography}
Simulations of muon tomography are very promising and results can be
obtained within a very short exposure time of approximately
\unit{1}{\minute}. The GEANT4 Monte Carlo package is used for the
simulations because it implements a complete, accurate and validated
model for multiple scattering. A detailed GEANT4 simulation of a
passenger van has been produced and reconstruction was achieved using
two different methods: mean and median. \citep{statisticalRec2007}

\begin{figure}
  \includegraphics[width=\linewidth]{pile01/muon03.png}
  \caption{Illustration of major objects in a simulated passenger van
    using GEANT4. The red block in the centre represents a
    \unit{10\times10\times10}{\cubic{\centi\metre}} solid piece of
    tungsten which is a high Z threat
    object. \citep{statisticalRec2007}}
\end{figure}
\begin{figure}
  \includegraphics[width=\linewidth]{pile01/muon04.png}
  \caption{Reconstruction of \unit{1}{\minute} of simulation muon
    exposure of the passenger van using the mean
    method. \citep{statisticalRec2007}}
  \label{fig:muon04}
\end{figure}
\begin{figure}
  \includegraphics[width=\linewidth]{pile01/muon05.png}
  \caption{Reconstruction of \unit{1}{\minute} of simulation muon
    exposure of the passenger van using the median
    method. \citep{statisticalRec2007}}
  \label{fig:muon05}
\end{figure}

The mean method of reconstruction shown in Figure~\ref{fig:muon04}
contains red spots scattered over the image.  The median method shown
in Figure~\ref{fig:muon05} does not contain these effects. The denser
components of the van (engine, battery, drive train) are shown as
green (low Z) or blue (medium) but the high Z threat object stands out
as red. The median method is clearly
better. \citep{statisticalRec2007}

A ray crossing algorithm has been developed that highlights locations
where strongly scattered muons cross paths. The basis of the ray
crossing algorithm is the fact that a high Z object produces many
highly scattered rays which intersect in a small volume. A large depth
of medium Z material can also produce highly scattered rays but these
rays will spread over a larger volume. The algorithm was applied to a
simulated scene of a \unit{6\times2.4\times2.4}{\cubic\metre} cargo
container filled with \unit{12}{tons} of iron and three
\unit{9\times9\times12}{\cubic{\centi\metre}} uranium bricks were
buried within the iron. A cosmic ray exposure of \unit{1}{\minute} was
simulated and the tracks were processed using the ray crossing
algorithm. The results are shown in
Figure~\ref{fig:muon06}. \citep{imageRec2004}

\begin{figure}
  \includegraphics[width=\linewidth]{pile01/muon06.png}
  \caption{Ray crossing algorithm reconstructions of \unit{1}{\minute}
    of simulated muon radiography of a
    \unit{6\times2.4\times2.4}{\cubic\metre} cargo container filled
    with \unit{12}{tons} of iron and three
    \unit{9\times9\times12}{\cubic{\centi\metre}} uranium bricks (a)
    and without the uranium bricks (b). \citep{imageRec2004}}
  \label{fig:muon06}
\end{figure}

All three uranium bricks are clearly identified in
Figure~\ref{fig:muon06}a. The image without the uranium bricks is
empty of any signal as shown in Figure~\ref{fig:muon06}b. The ray
crossing algorithm shows great promise in eliminating the scattering
background. \citep{imageRec2004}

Other simulations were also produced using a Monte Carlo simulation
code and the results are shown in Figure~\ref{fig:muon07}.

\begin{figure}
  \includegraphics[width=\linewidth]{pile01/muon07.png}
  \caption{Muon radiograph of a complex target in a volume of
    \unit{9\times3\times5.5}{\cubic\metre}. The first object (a) is a
    large complex lead sculpture. The reconstructed image (b) shows
    much of the detail of the object and it’s based on
    \unit{1}{\minute} of exposure. The second object (c) consists of a
    \unit{4\times2.4\times2.4}{\cubic\metre} container with walls of
    thickness equivalent to \unit{3}{\milli\metre} of steel. There are
    69 sheep made of water (shown in blue) inside the container with a
    body size of \unit{60\times30\times40}{\cubic{\centi\metre}} and
    three uranium bricks of size
    \unit{9\times9\times12}{\cubic{\centi\metre}} (shown in
    black). The reconstructed image (d), based on \unit{1}{\minute} of
    exposure, shows that the 3 uranium bricks stand out. The colour
    intensity in the two reconstructed images corresponds to the
    significance of the signal. \citep{Priedhorsky2003}}
  \label{fig:muon07}
\end{figure}

\subsubsection{Experimental results of muon tomography}
There are a few prototype experimental muon tomography detectors that
show excellent results which are consistent with the simulations.  A
small scale experimental detector system was developed in 2003 at the
Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, New Mexico.
\citep{Priedhorsky2003} A picture of the detector is shown in
Figure~\ref{fig:muon08}.

\begin{figure}
  \includegraphics[width=\linewidth]{pile01/muon08.png}
  \caption{Picture of experimental apparatus at the Los Alamos
    National Laboratory in 2003. There are four muon detectors
    labelled D1-D4 with a vertical spacing of
    \unit{27}{\centi\metre}. The detectors determine the positions and
    angles of the muons in two orthogonal coordinates (X and Y). The
    test object (W) was a tungsten cylinder of radius
    \unit{5.5}{\centi\metre} and height \unit{5.7}{\centi\metre}. A
    thick Lexan (L) plate of dimensions
    \unit{35\times60\times1}{\cubic{\centi\metre}} and steel support
    beams (B) were used to support the test object. \citep{Priedhorsky2003}}
  \label{fig:muon08}
\end{figure}

Eight X and eight Y locations were measured for each muon by four
ionising radiation detectors contained in the detector stack. The two
detectors on top measure the incoming muon track while the two
detectors at the bottom measure the scattered track. Each delay line
drift chamber detector had an active area of
\unit{60\times60}{\square{\centi\metre}}. The detector was calibrated
with no test object to determine the precision of the position
measurement. A Windows based acquisition program was used to collect
the data. The reconstruction was approximated using the following
simple technique. Multiple scattered tracks were approximated to have
only a single scattering event and the point of scatter was located by
extrapolating the incident and scattered rays. A maximum likelihood
technique was used to assign voxels (3D pixels) to each scattered
muon. The reconstructed 3D image of the tungsten test object is shown
in Figure~\ref{fig:muon09}. \citep{Priedhorsky2003}

\begin{figure}
  \includegraphics[width=\linewidth]{pile01/muon09.png}
  \caption{Test object reconstruction using 100\,000 muons. A
    volumetric image of \unit{1\times1\times1}{\cubic{\centi\metre}}
    voxels was reconstructed. The eight planes are horizontal slices
    near the middle of the volume, moving from top to bottom. Both the
    tungsten cylinder and the steel support beams are clearly
    visible. \citep{Priedhorsky2003}}
  \label{fig:muon09}
\end{figure}

The data for Figure~\ref{fig:muon09} were collected over several hours
because the detector was not fully optimised. An optimised detector
with 100\% tracking efficiency and large solid angle could acquire the
same data in approximately \unit{30}{\minute}. The test object and the
test support beams can be clearly resolved using this long
run. Considerably shorter runs could be used for a simple yes/no
detection. \citep{Priedhorsky2003}

Another sub-scale prototype was built at the Los Alamos National
Laboratory in 2006 called the Large Muon Tracker (LMT) which is 20'
tall. The design of this detector is very similar to the previous
detector. It consists of 6 top and 6 bottom planes of drift tube
detectors for each X and Y dimensions (24 planes in total) on a
flexible frame. The top and bottom sections are separated by
\unit{1.5}{\metre} to allow a large sampling region. X and Y tracks
are fitted separately to find the slope and intercept of each
dimension and combining them yields the 3D trajectory of the muon. A
picture of LMT is shown in Figure~\ref{fig:muon10}. \citep{green2006}

\begin{figure}
  \includegraphics[width=\linewidth]{pile01/muon10.png}
  \caption{The Large Muon Tracker (LMT) prototype at the Los Alamos
    National Laboratory in 2006.  The precise positions of muon tracks
    above and below the sampling region are determined by the
    overlapping X and Y detector planes. The new redundant detector
    planes will be used improve the tracking efficiency and
    quality. \citep{green2006}}
  \label{fig:muon10}
\end{figure}

The prototype of LMT was completed and tested in 2008. A simple
reconstruction technique was used to process the data. The sample
volume of \unit{1.5\times1.5\times1.0}{\cubic\metre} was segmented
into \unit{2\times2\times2}{\cubic{\centi\metre}} voxels. The median
scattering angle was calculated for all muons whose trajectories
intersected a voxel with an adjustable distance. The prototype was
tested using a \unit{10\times10\times10}{\cubic{\centi\metre}} lead
cube that represented the threat object and it was placed in the LMT
along with a car engine and transmission.  A photograph of the engine
in the LMT is shown in Figure~\ref{fig:muon11}. \citep{morris2008}

\begin{figure}
  \includegraphics[width=\linewidth]{pile01/muon11.png}
  \caption{Photograph of a car engine in the LMT at the Los Alamos
    National Laboratory in 2008. \citep{morris2008}}
  \label{fig:muon11}
\end{figure}

Data were collected for approximately \unit{160}{\minute} and have
been analysed to reconstruct the images shown in
Figure~\ref{fig:muon12}. The mean scattering angle is plotted for all
trajectories that pass through each voxel. \citep{morris2008}

\begin{figure}
  \includegraphics[width=\linewidth]{pile01/muon12.png}
  \caption{Mean scattering angle for a slice through the scene
    \unit{50}{\centi\metre} above the base plate. The left image shows
    the car engine, the middle image shows the engine with the lead
    cube and the right image shows the difference of the other two
    images. The lead block stands out dramatically. \citep{morris2008}}
  \label{fig:muon12}
\end{figure}

Another muon tomography prototype is located at the INFN National
Laboratories of Legnaro, Padova, Italy. A volume of
\unit{11}{\cubic\metre} can be inspected using the prototype which is
ideal for cargo inspection. A picture of the prototype is shown in
Figure~\ref{fig:muon13}. \citep{pesente2009}

\begin{figure}
  \includegraphics[width=\linewidth]{pile01/muon13.png}
  \caption{Muon tomography system prototype located at the INFN
    National Laboratories of Legnaro. \citep{pesente2009}}
  \label{fig:muon13}
\end{figure}

Two Muon Barrel drift chambers of dimensions
\unit{300\times250\times29}{\cubic{\centi\metre}}, built for the CMS
experiment at CERN, were used for the experiment, separated by
\unit{160}{\centi\metre}. A concrete and iron structure is supporting
the chambers. There are two additional drift chambers underneath the
bottom detector that will be used in the future as a momentum
filter. The reconstruction procedure uses a List Mode Iterative
Algorithm (LMIA) that process events one at a time instead of grouping
similar events together. \citep{pesente2009}

\begin{figure}
  \includegraphics[width=\linewidth]{pile01/muon14.png}
  \caption{Test of the imaging capability of the prototype. The
    picture on the left shows the layout of iron bricks forming the
    word INFN and the picture on the right shows the result of the
    data analysis using the LMIA. The reconstructed image is very
    clear. \citep{pesente2009}}
\end{figure}

The experiment was repeated using two lead blocks of dimensions
\unit{10\times10\times20}{\cubic{\centi\metre}} and two iron blocks of
dimensions \unit{10\times20\times20}{\cubic{\centi\metre}} placed on a
support structure \unit{65}{\centi\metre} in the vertical
direction. The 3D reconstruction of this layout is shown in
Figure~\ref{fig:muon15}.

\begin{figure}
  \includegraphics[width=\linewidth]{pile01/muon15.png}
  \caption{The left image is a sketch of the layout with the two lead
    and the two iron blocks. The darker blocks are the lead
    blocks. The right image shows the 3D view of the reconstructed
    image using the LMIA. \citep{pesente2009}}
  \label{fig:muon15}
\end{figure}

The position of the blocks is reproduced correctly but there is finite
spatial resolution in the reconstruction especially in the vertical
direction. The reconstructed scattering density of the lead blocks is
greater than that of the iron blocks. It’s straightforward to
discriminate low Z or medium Z materials from high Z materials using
this method. The problem with this method is that discrimination
between high Z materials denser than iron is more difficult because of
the non-linearity in the reconstructed scattering density. This means
that the muon momentum has to be measured as well to allow a better
material recognition and increase the statistical precision of the
density measurement. \citep{pesente2009}

\subsubsection{Applications of muon tomography}
Muon tomography could be used to protect the rail network from
terrorism. The idea is to equip train stations with large muon
detectors above and below. Density images can be produced very fast in
a time scale of minutes. High density objects such as nail bombs and
fissile materials will be easily identified. \citep{nichol}

It could also be used as a detection method of nuclear devices or
material in vehicles and containers.  An automobile sized counting
station could be used to scan vehicles at border crossing. This would
allow examination of every vehicle and shipping container crossing a
border. It will require enough detectors to handle the traffic at the
borders. The total traffic crossing the US -- Mexico and the US --
Canada borders in 2008 was \(1.3\times10^8\) vehicles. Assuming a
single muon tomography detector could analyse a vehicle within
\unit{1}{\minute} and operates for 12 hours per day, then 500
detectors would be needed to handle the entire border crossing
traffic. This would cost a total of \$1.5--\$2 billion but its
negligible compared to the consequences of the detonation of a nuclear
bomb. A picture of how it could be implemented at a border crossing is
shown in Figure~\ref{fig:muon16}. \citep{morris2008}

\begin{figure}
  \includegraphics[width=\linewidth]{pile01/muon16.png}
  \caption{Schematic view of how a counting station might
    look. Vehicles would have to stop for approximately 20 seconds for
    the scan. \citep{morris2008}}
  \label{fig:muon16}
\end{figure}

Both methods could be used for nuclear dismantlement verification. The
vehicle transporting the bomb for disarmament could be scanned at
several stations during its journey to the dismantlement facilities. A
single muon tomography detector at the dismantlement facility could be
used to verify a small quantity of nuclear bombs. If there is a large
number of bombs queued for verification then the idea of the train
stations could be used. A room with muon detectors on the flood and
the ceiling could be used to scan all of them at the same time.

\section{Confidence, National Security}
When talking about dismantlement of nuclear warheads, the scale of the
dismantlement must be taken into account. The limit for any process to
work is for there to be a very high chance of discovering if anyone is
cheating. It is useful to make a broad categorisation here between the
dismantlement of the Russian and American stockpiles and the possible
dismantlement the rest of the nuclear weapon states (NWS) might
undergo.

Russian and American stockpiles are in the thousands and so the
dismantlement process to reduce these will need a very low confidence
level to ensure a high chance of discovering cheating. When thousands
of warheads are being dismantled, a confidence percentage in the
single digits would be enough. Other NWS have warheads in the low
hundreds and so any dismantlement here would be much more difficult to
achieve.  The benefits to both individual nations' security and
international security of dismantling at this level is also very
debatable. Taking this into account it seems pertinent to focus on the
Russia/America dismantlement.

As already mentioned in other sections, the verification of the
dismantlement procedure needs to balance confidence with information
barriers, to ensure no NPT information is not released. It also seems
that the information barriers required by America and Russia are so
severe as to be a red/green light pass/fail system. Illustrated here:

\begin{figure}
  \includegraphics[width=\linewidth]{pile01/jack.png}
\end{figure}

From earlier sections, it is clear that this sort of system can be
technically achieved. There are ways of maximising the confidence
level of such a system:
\begin{itemize}
  \item Both parties developing the design of the dismantlement
    facility and components together
  \item Both parties being familiar with the equipment and
    understanding the procedure
  \item Observation of construction
  \item Random selection of components for both measurement and
    validation
\end{itemize}

The validation procedure can be particularly useful here. The
procedure is as follows:
\begin{enumerate}
  \item Several identical components are presented
  \item Two are randomly chosen, one for measurement by the host, one
    for validation by the observer
  \item The component for validation can be checked by the
    observer. If shown to be proper, then it can be assumed the
    measurement component is also correct.
\end{enumerate}

This validation allows the observer to be sure that the components are
indeed identical, even with a low number of components to randomly
choose from, because the process will be repeated for each warhead. If
this is used, the design must be such that the observer is sure that
the measurement component is at no point switched.

These measures may not be able to assure the required confidence, if
one party is determined enough to cheat. Whilst the component
validation system is useful, it cannot be entirely relied upon. A
dismantlement facility may be able to be designed such that it appears
to the observer to be of correct design, but actually allows the host
to circumvent the measures mentioned before.

In order to analyse this fully, the motivation to cheat must be
considered.  If one party can maintain its own stockpile whilst the
other dismantles, then it has a significant first strike
advantage. This is a strategy of surprise attack, to attempt to wipe
out enough of the opponent's nuclear capability to be able to survive
the retaliation. This motivation however must be balanced against the
statistical likelihood of a nuclear accident, whilst maintaining a
large warhead stockpile. If the repercussions of a nuclear accident
could be as severe as repercussions of nuclear war then it is easier
to advocate dismantlement. Whilst it may be possible to quantify the
chance of a nuclear accident, it is harder to quantify the chance of
nuclear war, so it is difficult to properly balance these two
risks. It is also useful to consider whether political establishments
in these two countries will take both risks into account properly.

With this clear motivation to cheat it is difficult to design a
foolproof system. However, it may be worth advocating reducing the
motivation to cheat, to improve confidence in dismantlement. This
could be in the form of both countries improving their second-strike
capabilities, so that preemptive strike is less appealing. If
second-strike capabilities were considered to be enough to assure
mutually assured destruction, even with a much lower stockpile than an
opposing nation, it helps to alleviate the motivation to cheat for
both parties, and thereby helps the dismantlement process. This is the
policy taken by many of the other NWS e.g. UK, France.

\renewcommand{\refname}{\vspace*{-1.5em}\section{References}\vspace*{-1em}}
\bibliographystyle{unsrtnat}
\bibliography{references}

\end{document}
